Excuse me, chair.
I, I don't know if you can hear us,
but you're on mute in that room. There
We go. Yep.
Oh, sweet. We can see you. See you there.
Oh, there we go. Brilliant. Okay.
Very good. Well, I think, uh,
we can start the afternoon session on the RMA reform bills,
and, uh, we welcome our first submitter
for the afternoon session, Oceania Gold.
So, welcome to the committee this afternoon.
You've got 20 minutes with us, so we will hand it over
to you for your introductions and opening remarks,
and then open it up for questions.
Thank you. Good afternoon.
Uh, and thank you for the opportunity to do an oral,
oral submission on the bills.
Um, I'm Alison Paul, senior Vice President for Legal
and Public Affairs for Oceania Gold.
I'm Hamish Harwood. I'm a resource management lawyer
with Simpson Gress here for Oceania Gold today.
So we are going to aim to keep our oral submission
to the 10 minute mark so
that we leave any time for questions.
Um, and I also just want to open by extending an offer
to visit any of our sites.
Hopefully we're going to provide some information in the
handouts that gives some, um, uh, illustrations
of the topics we wanna talk to.
But, um, any member of the committee is welcome
to visit the sites at any time.
Uh, and, uh, additionally, we do make, uh, or,
or as we've prepared the submission, have had additional,
um, points occur to us, uh, that may be in, in terms
of drafting of assistance to the committee.
So if that were thought to be helpful,
we could provide supplementary, um, uh, drafting examples.
I'll begin with talking about who we are. Uh, Oceania Gold.
We operate gold mines at MACRAs in Northeast Otago,
and at why he, which is at the base of the peninsula.
And we have a fully restored mine site at
Ton on the West coast.
Both of the existing operating mines have operated
for over 35 years,
and that's been across dozens of consenting rounds together.
The mines across New Zealand directly employ 1200 people
and several hundred contracted companies
and their employees as well.
So that number has gone up.
We've been employing more people in recent, uh, months.
We spend over $500 million annually on our operations in
New Zealand, and over 80% of that stays in New Zealand.
It's spent here. Our wages are about
$180 million,
and the PAYE component of that represents about $50 million.
Our exports in 2025 were $1.36 billion.
So, uh, if you rank the different commodities
that New Zealand exports to the world,
just the Oceania gold production of gold would rank 15th in
that list of our corporate income tax
provision for 2025,
as reported in our recent financial statements.
So that is about 150 million US dollars.
Uh, you could reach the view that half
of the businesses in New Zealand, about half of
that is in relation to New Zealand owed income tax for 2025,
and that would be a fair assumption.
Royalties for last year are likely
to be in the order of 18 million.
As I've said, we operate under hundreds
of resource consents,
and we have bonds in place for the remediation
of our sites at the moment.
Those have a value, a combined value of $170 million.
So I'll just, uh, talk to the two handouts in front of you.
Um, these are by way of background to the points
that we want to make today in relation to spatial planning
and the application of environmental needs.
So the first of those handouts looks like this.
It's in relation to the NZP
and M web maps for mineral permits.
Just to explain, um, that
what you can see there across New Zealand, uh,
particular hotpots hotspots in Otago, the West Coast.
And for a Mandel, the red color
is prospecting permits.
And prospecting permits are very lightweight.
They allow for aerial surveys and those kinds of things,
and they are really looking for areas of mineralization.
So they are by far, by far and away the greatest area.
They, uh, the green permits that you can see,
there are exploration permits.
And under our system in the Crown Minerals Act,
they can have a term of 18 years.
And the last part of that is actually appraising a
discovery that's been made.
So it's in the exploration phase
that these drill holes in the ground,
and you are looking for particular areas of interest.
The mining permits are that teal color,
and you can see on this one, the top right hand, the teal,
the biggest teal one is MACRAs.
And that would be the biggest in in the country.
That is reflective of 35 years
of expanding that mining permit.
And even there, that is broadly showing,
um, areas of land that we mostly own.
We own about 15,000 hectares,
but of that, all of the areas
of disturbance in 35 years would amount to no more than two
and a half thousand hectares.
So to put all that inspective, even the area of disturbance
that's been resource consented for mining is a small.in
that teal color.
Moving to the second handout, um,
and that's the one that looks like this.
The first picture on that handout is
of a small ephemeral wetland at CRAs.
So that is the kind of wetland that we would expect
to see included in environmental limits where we are looking
for some degree of flexibility.
The next page of that handout shows an exercise
that was undertaken several years ago
of wetlands in the McCray Ecological District.
Those are the blue teal colored spots.
Uh, the mine is this area of gray that you can see there.
So as you can see, uh, wetlands
and, uh, uh, they include the ephemeral type are, um, uh,
very common in the McCray ecological District,
but have at the moment the quality
and environmental limits of requiring offsetting,
or in some instances being not capable
of being offset in the view of the legislators.
The next page is, and the page
after that are applying some
of the likely filters under current national direction
that we think would carry across into the new legislation
for deciding where there are, um, areas
of significant natural areas
or in significant indigenous biodiversity.
So again, for setting environmental limits,
and you can see the blue areas, uh, the freehold
with an overlay in that instance of, uh, rarity.
Uh, the next one shows an overlay of rarity, um, in relation
to species and, uh, representativeness.
So by the time you apply all of those overlays,
the blue areas that you can still see are very minimal.
And so I guess the point that I'm seeking to, to make is
that on the one hand, you have the
crown minerals estate that the crown regards
as being an important thing, uh,
and important enough to warrant the issue of,
of all sorts of permits.
And on the other hand, you run the risk that you sterilize
that through the application of environmental limits
because of the nature of mining, which is, um,
very much locationally constrained.
The mining has to occur where you find the resource.
Secondly, it's big. It creates big land forms.
And thirdly, it occurs in non-urban environments
where you can expect to encounter this kind of level of, um,
overlay in relation to environmental limits.
So we are not in any sense asking for the standard
to be reduced in relation to environmental limits,
but we are asking for flexibility in the way they
are applied.
We can see in the goals reference
to offsetting in particular, and no net loss, uh,
and we think that needs to be better
provided for than it is at the moment.
So on that, I'll hand over to Hamish.
Thank you, Allison. Um, so with my comments, I,
I would like to keep in mind that Oceania gold supports the,
um, goal and, um, clause 11 of the natural environment bill,
which is to achieve no net loss of,
uh, indigenous biodiversity.
But the issue with environmental limits from our perspective
is the risk of unintended consequences.
And, and that could be where, um, hard rules, um, might,
um, uh, perhaps sterilize or,
or, um, constrain deserving projects, um, in,
in an unintended manner.
And we, we think the answer to that is
that permit authorities should not be prevented from
granting, um, natural resource permits due
to an isolated breach of a limit.
Instead, what we see as essential for large projects
as an ability to look at a project as a whole
and the, the full, um, proposal and package of, um, offsets
or compensation or measures to remedy at, um,
environmental effects rather than getting stuck at a,
a hard limit as such.
And the types of projects that potentially will be caught
by these limits, what Allison mentioned,
they have these three characteristics.
They're large, they're non-urban, so they're in rural areas,
um, and they're spatially constrained.
And the other example of these types
of activities is significant infrastructure.
Um, and that,
that tension is actually highlighted in sections
or clauses 85 and 86 of the, um, petal environment bill.
And what happens there is section 85 sets up a presumption
against breaches of environmental limits.
So that's a starting point, but then 86 goes on to provide,
I guess, a release valve for, um, infrastructure activities.
And, and that says that if you're an infrastructure
activity, you can have some, um, some breaches.
And, and we think the same thing should be applied more
generally to these activities that are large,
spatially constrained, um, and non-urban.
And so we, we think that offsetting is
an important aspect to this.
It's not the only aspect, um,
but the ability to look at, again, the full suite
of what's being proposed by a applicant to achieve
the no net loss standard.
And I'd just like to talk to an example quickly, um,
which is around wetlands.
And conveniently we've got a picture of this ephemeral
wetland at CRAs.
So if, if the limits were such that, um,
there were hard barriers to affecting these small wetlands
that don't have high ecological values, again,
we could trip into some unintended consequences, um, here
and, and that should be avoided in, in our, in our view.
Um, while I'm with the subject of wetlands, um,
it is, um, perhaps surprising
that the bills don't include a definition of wetland at all.
Um, and obviously there's been a huge amount
of litigation about what a wetland is
or isn't for, for many years.
And, and in our submission,
the bills should confront that issue.
It's a perfect opportunity to define the types of wetlands
that warrant protection and those that do not.
And we've offered a suggestion in our written
submission of some wording.
Um, and hopefully, um, you'll, uh, give
that some consideration.
Now, the second topic I'd like
to talk about is spatial planning,
and particularly the need to provide for,
uh, the mineral sector
and the extractive sector through national instruments
and in, in turn spatial planning.
And we think it's important for the legislation
to require this not to simply just leave it
to the decision maker of the day
who ends up drafting these instruments
because the, um, these issues are well known,
they're well traversed, and it's important if,
if the regime's gonna stay with this funnel, that important
resource management sector is actually dealt with
and grappled with at the top end.
And it's possible to do this.
'cause extractives, they are large, there are unique class
of activity, but they're also well understood, um,
they've been around for a long time,
and the effects can be managed.
So there's, there's no reason why we can't have, um,
a section in the national planning
framework about extractives and even standardized zones.
And it is important because the way the bills are drafted,
the regime can be quite harsh
if your activities are not covered in these
front end documents.
So this is a bit technical,
but, uh, as an example, um, there is
an ability to appeal the inclusion of a bespoke revision
and a, in a plan,
but there's no ability to appeal one
that hasn't been included.
So if the first instance decision maker says, um, for, um,
say, MACRAs, um,
you don't need any special rules, then that's it.
You can't, you can't go any further.
If, if there are special rules included, then you know,
people can appeal those, but otherwise it's a hard barrier.
So that's just one example to hide the points
of getting that top end.
Right. And, and
because that's so important, the legislation needs to say
what the top end includes and,
and the extractive sector is one that needs
to be specifically listed.
So in terms of a suggestion, um,
in schedule two, there's clause three.
That's the man, a list of mandatory matters
for regional spatial plans.
As a general observation, that list includes, um,
environmental limits, and then it has a heavy urban focus.
There's very little in there about
what happens in rural areas.
And we suggest that, um, providing for the aggregate
and mining sector should be included in that list.
Um, we have made, um,
some fairly detailed written comments about the duplication
between wildlife permits and resource consents,
and I don't wish to necessarily talk to you about those,
but happy to take any questions, um, if that would assist.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much.
Um, we've got our first question from Rachel Brooking.
Thank you both. Uh, it's two small questions.
Uh, one on that spatial planning topic that you were just,
um, talking about Hamish, uh, are you imagining
that spatial plannings could include something
like mining zones?
Yes. And that's what you're, that would be what you'd want.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
Um, and then my second question is around, uh, no net loss.
And you've referred to that a few times in
projects that you've done.
Do you think no net loss is enough,
and would you argue
that Oceania Gold's been doing more than no net loss
and there's actually been a net gain?
That's certainly been our, um, our aim
and the test, of course has been no net loss
and preferably a net gain since this has been part
of the RMA system, really for the last 13 or more years.
So that is our game, our aim, and,
and it was certainly the aim with the, uh, YHE North project
that we've just fast tracked consented where, uh, we, um,
took a precautionary approach
and an adaptive management approach to the effect
of vibrations on frogs on the surface.
We then overlaid that with, uh, a biodiversity offsetting
approach with pest and predator control over double the
vibration area of the mine in order to really, um,
thoroughly deal with the possibility
of any effect on the breeding
of frogs in the vibration area.
And then over and above that,
we then introduced a further pest
and predator control biodiversity project.
So we tried to put layer on top of layer,
and I think, um, you can expect a company like Ocean
and a goal to be bringing that level of commitment
to the table, um,
but as long as the flexibility's there to allow that.
Mm-hmm. I might just ask a supplementary on that,
because that is quite as substantial.
Part of your submission is the duplication
between the Wildlife Act and the RMA.
Um, so you feel that the RMA, uh, sufficiently,
um, you know, has enough checks
and balances there for you to manage the, the wildlife.
Yeah. And you've given examples of the lizards
that you obviously removed 4,000 from the
site That's right.
At cra. So, so the Wildlife Act is, it protects species,
but it's, it's not linked
to the threat classification system in any way.
So if, if a species is native, it's protected, um,
it did previously have a focus really on individuals
and whether there had been, um, one that had been harmed
or killed, and if there had been,
were all reasonable steps taken to prevent
that happening as a defense.
That, um, has turned into, through case law
and legislative change, a kind
of a dual focus on individuals and on population level.
When you talk about a very large exercise, um, such
as earth moving at MACRAs,
you're talking about a very large exercise to achieve that
or reasonable steps, and that looks like a lizard salvage,
which was the biggest ever attempted in New Zealand.
And people are saying it may in fact be the biggest in the
world for re for salvaging visits.
So the reality of that was, um, over 4,000 were relocated
of threatened and non threatened.
Some of them were actually common lizards, um, of a kind
that, um, we see every day around us.
And some were certainly, um,
further up the threat classification of that 4,000 moved,
we had 53 casualties that we're aware of.
So the reality is in the RMA setting,
those population level, um, mitigations such
as lizard salvage exercises are absolutely part
of the RMA process.
And, uh, it really makes no sense to duplicate
that all over again with the Wildlife Act.
No, thank you for that clarification.
Um, and Ryan has a question.
Oh, thanks again. Probably along the same theme,
I guess you've, you've, you've highlighted it well,
but you talk about your elevation of offsetting
and mitigations in the full sweep rather than looking
at a breach in isolation.
I think that's a point that you, that's well made.
And is that been a challenge you've come up against,
that you get pinged on one thing,
but you know, throwing out the baby with the bath water,
perhaps an example?
Um, so, so an example is actually the ephemeral wetlands.
So the, the, um, example
that's in the handout was from a consenting round called
deep down North in 20 20, 20 19, 20 20, um, when the
NPS for indigenous biodiversity
and freshwater were both, um, pretty new.
I think it was just fresh water at that point.
Um, but cycle forward to, uh, a,
a resource consent for further exp expansions at Macres.
Um, the view of council that was taken last year was
that any ephemeral wetland,
because it's a nationally critical habitat, habitat type,
albeit it's very common in the crazy ecological district,
is incapable of being offset that the ecological view is,
it's too, too, um, high up that threat classification
for habitats to,
to be supportable through an offset approach.
If that is the approach that is taken, then, um,
those numerous on the, on the map that you can see,
those are just the larger wetlands that have been mapped.
That was a very small one.
But any ephemeral wetland, any description
with no flexibility will be a complete bar
to the ongoing operation of the mine
and the over 750 people that it employs
At, at this stage.
The RMA doesn't contain this limit framework.
So in including it in these bills creates a greater risk
that, um, there will be more limits.
So you've got more, you know, hard edges that, um,
could lead to these perverse
or inadvertent situations. Alright, thank
You. Thank you. And
look, we'll just take one last quick question
from LA who's had a hand up
Koto, thanks for your submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up as well on the Wildlife Act override
that, you know, you are referring to as an overlap
and particularly interested in
why you think there is justification
where basically councils would be able to take over
the role of doc.
And I'm noting, you know, even your comments just earlier
that, you know, if species are under the Wildlife Act,
they'll be protected.
Um, and, and that may be very well
and good for known species.
Like, you know, with CRAs, you've worked really closely
with the, the Department of Conservation for years.
Um, but I'm noting, you know, in the same area around, uh,
your mining site, there's numerous species of
endangered native fish
that are not currently protected under the Wildlife Act.
So how would taking that decision making from dock
actually be appropriate when we are talking about some
of these more rare unknown species?
Thanks for the question.
Um, the reality is
that even though the Wildlife Act doesn't extend,
for example, to galaxys,
they're comprehensively addressed in the
resource consenting setting.
And that includes, um, dock being part of that
in its capacity as essentially a submitter.
But it's a, a very influential submitter.
And the reality is that any engagement we do ahead
of consenting a project on how we're going
to manage different species, whether they're aquatic
or terrestrial, uh, involves the Department of Conservation
and its specialist ecologists.
So I cannot think of an example where the Wildlife Act
or any other piece of legislation has come
through in relation to management of impacts on species
and has done a more comprehensive
role or has filled the gap.
All it does is duplicate. Look, thank you very much.
We are gonna have to leave it there. We have met time.
Uh, we appreciate your insights
and, um, your submission today.
So thank you. Thank you.
So we now welcome our next submitter who, uh, many of us are
familiar with, and obviously this is
a familiar place to you.
Uh, next Smith, mayor of Nelson City Council,
welcome to the committee this afternoon.
You have 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Well, Kira, and thank you very much, uh,
for the opportunity to make, uh, this submission.
Uh, I'm in awe of the scale of the task that yourself
and your advisors have
and getting the details of these bill, right,
noting both the size of the bills
and they're significant to New Zealand
and the number of submissions
and the importance of getting it.
All right. Um, the first thing is there are four aspects
of these reform bills that, uh, we very strongly support.
Uh, the first of those is the need for fewer flan plans.
Uh, new Zealand's a relatively small country,
and despite all the geographic spread
and the differences across it, uh, we don't think our,
our country can justify the number of plans, uh, out
of the existing RMA.
And I do know that the previous governments reform
had that common theme.
Secondly, uh, we think it's a good call
to separate out that the,
the planning in the Natural Environment Act.
Uh, if we reflect back on the 1980s
and the sort of development of the previous RMA,
it was a big brave world to try
and put these quite two distinct roles of planning.
The development of communities
and protection of the environment did one act.
We made the assumption as a country
that everybody would follow, they didn't.
Uh, and so I think that's a sound part, uh,
of this legislation.
Uh, thirdly, uh, it is a very significant change
for a council like, uh, mine,
but others around the country
that this legislative framework returns us
to a more familiar Westminster model
where elected representatives, councils make the rules
and the courts then interpret them,
then actually having the courts climb into the exercise
of writing plans.
Uh, and the rules, neither will ever be perfect, uh,
but I think that traditional role is better.
And the last part of which I would compliment the both the
drafters of the bill
and the architecture is as a council,
there is a far greater sense of symmetry
and direction with what the government is doing
with these two reform bills.
What you're doing with local water done well
and what is being done with the simplification
of local government and for councils to have
that consistency is important.
Now, I'm on a mission today,
and there is only one thing of which I am pleading
for, uh, my city that is essential to be changed, uh,
in this bill.
And that is with respect to the provisions of joint planning
and want the committee to understand
the unique situation that we have, uh,
in our corner of New Zealand.
Uh, Nelson is a unitary council.
That means for planning purposes.
And these two bills, we are treated as a regional council,
as is our neighbor, Tasman.
We each have a population of about 55,000 people.
But what occurs nowhere else in New Zealand is
that you have a contiguous population
of over 70,000 people straddling two regions.
Now, uh, the problem with that
is that these bills make no provision for us to be able
to jointly plan the growth of
that urban area and the region.
And let me explain the implications of that.
Between the last two census, actually Tasman,
our neighbors had the fastest population growth of anywhere,
of any region in New Zealand at over 10%.
And what the bill provides for, if you are a Hawkes Bay,
you can develop a single spatial plan for the Hawkes Bay
or for Canterbury that has 10 districts or the West coast.
But because we are two unit trees, we don't have
that option.
Now, this may seem a little ironic, uh,
when I was a national member of Parliament for 31 years, uh,
but my plea is to include the equivalent provision
that the previous labor government
included in their spatial planning bill, section
14, one of that act.
Now repealed took a very pragmatic approach
and said quite specifically that for the purposes of Nelson
and Tasmine, you shall be treated as one region
and you be required to develop one spatial plan.
Why does that make such great sense?
Well, firstly, the current government is saying a key
objective is less plans ticks that box.
It would mean 16 rather than the 17.
Secondly, if you look at any of the issues, difficult issues
that our region is grappling with,
where do we set more residential areas?
Where do we provide for industrial land?
How are we gonna provide for the transport infrastructure
and the water infrastructure?
All of those can only be sensibly addressed in our fast
growing area by doing it together.
Uh, actually because of those growth pressures, the Nelson
and Tasman councils long
before I became mayor in 2020, decided
to develop their own spatial plan
and the old framework referred to
as a future urban development strategy, uh, together.
The third reason is it'll be much
more efficient and less costly.
The government is rightly concerned about
the impacts on rates.
My honest view is few in parliament realize just
how expensive the process of writing these new spatial,
these new land use
and these natural environment plans will be.
But I say with hand on heart, there will be millions
of dollars of savings
for the Nelson Tasman region if we do it together.
I draw to your attention that the last
and the first generation
of plans under the Resource Management Act
cost over a billion dollars to develop.
And that was over 20 years ago.
There is very large money, you should be looking
for efficiencies, and there's that opportunity
for efficiency in our part of the world.
It will be more timely, we can get on with it more quickly,
and it would provide, uh, legislative, um, certainty.
That is the single most important message, uh,
from the Nelson, uh, city Council's submission.
But there are a number of others
that I will just mention in passing.
The first of those, uh, is around timing.
I note that the previous Nelson City Council plan was
notified in 1996.
It took to 2004 eight years, uh, for it to be done.
I don't think there is an appreciation of the level
of complexity that's involved in developing these plans.
I've been through several plan changes as Amir,
we're talking about writing the rules for 24,000 titles,
valued assets of 23 billion.
You're looking at the rules for building site boundaries,
building heights, air quality, noise, water,
natural hazards, risks.
This is a massive job.
And I have to tell you, when you work in local government,
you make a single mistake on a single one
of those 23,000 titles
and the cost implications, you can close down a business,
uh, you can hugely devalue them.
Uh, and so there is caution from my view, uh,
and in our submission, uh, around the timeframes.
Now, I said in my overall submission, I'm very supportive
of the government's plan
to have a natural environment act in a planning
because they are different functions.
But I would caution the committee
against the different notification tests on the two of them.
When you're a unitary council as we are,
and often you've got a consent that's coming in
that has water implications as well as building
and land use type implications,
when you create a different threshold
for when they are notified, uh, you will create an extra,
uh, complexity.
And we would prefer
that those two provisions were consistent.
Uh, as we said in the uh, written submission,
there are further, uh, 20, uh,
specific issues covered in our submissions.
More than happy to answer any questions on those,
but I just want to reemphasize the plea.
Please include a provision similar
to Section 14 one in the Spatial Planning Act
and take the pragmatic view
that rather than redesigning the joint planning provision,
just accept that there is unique situation in Nelson
and Tasmine and legislate
for a single spatial plan for our region.
And then give us the choice under the joint planning
provisions for us with the natural environment plan
and the land use plan to make it joint if we wish.
Again, I thank you for your time.
You No, thank you. Um, really interesting
and a really interesting point.
Um, I might just ask a quick question on that Section 14 one
because if that was reintroduced, how would
that specifically work and process?
I mean, you've kind of given the bigger picture overarching,
but if you were to give some exact examples in your
specific area, what's, what does
that look like in terms of implementation?
What it means is that we've got a strongly growing area
under the National Urban Development Strategy
that may vary in some sense.
Uh, we have to design for new residential areas.
How can you possibly, if you know the geography of my area
in the choices to whether you are going to allow to grow
by another couple of hundred, couple of thousand houses
or Brightwater or Richmond or Stoke
or the area north of Nelson, you can only really have
that conversation as once
because it is one particular urban area.
If you're making a decision around transport,
we run a common bus service.
The Nelson Tasman ebus service is one
that is developed together.
Uh, in the event that you stick with the bills as they are,
you're going to have the Nelson
and Tasman councils developing separate,
different spatial plans.
And that just makes no sense.
And it's also contrary to the work
that we've done over the last five years, uh,
where we've developed our urban strategy together,
we are able to persuade the previous minister, David Parker,
that that made common sense
and were simply asking for
that same provision, uh, in this bill.
Okay. No, thanks for that Rachel.
Uh, well, I agree with next question. Surprise, surprise.
Uh, so clearly.
Well, I think, just to be clear, Tasman also agrees
with your position on this. Do
They? Um, the,
I don't want to misrepresent it As for Tasman
to speak for themselves,
there's a healthy tension in the region.
I've been very plain about my position
that I would marry my good neighbor, uh,
and, uh, Tim King, uh, next door tomorrow, uh,
and have a single unitary council for the region.
That would've been my preference in 1992 when the Nelson
Marlborough Regional Council was abolished.
Uh, but sometimes in politics you don't bite off more
than what you can chew.
Uh, the Tasman position is that the mayor, Tim King,
has indicated his support for the legislative position,
but their council has not, uh, debated it.
And it's not for me to speak for my neighbors in Tasman.
It's helpful,
David.
Um, thank you very much for the submission
and uh, I'd like to talk to the Iwi partnership, uh,
considerations within your submission.
And you've mentioned there about the fact
that the three unit trees at the top
of the south are having an arrangement with Maori.
Could you potentially give us some context of how
that arrangement is today
and what potentially the new proposition
of these bills will have an effect on that?
Good question and complex.
We have eight iwi in the top of the south island,
a treaty settlement very significant in 2014.
Uh, in my first year as mayor, the three councils
and the eight iwi formed a partner agreement.
The reason for that is you can understand the complexity
when you've got three local authorities in eight iwi better
to bring, um, that forum together.
That relationship is maturing, uh,
but it's still, um, a work in progress, particularly
around resource management issues.
Now we'd have the extra complexity
with a very significant decision
of which I acknowledge the work of the government
in resolving the very substantive non treaty tense
settlement in the top of the south island.
Uh, that is going to even further
increase the economic involvement, uh,
of Maori in our community.
Now, um, you might ask the question as to
why, and they may have a preference.
And I have to be honest, I have not had the direct
conversation with the eight I iwi as
to why you would not do a single plan for the whole of the,
um, Nelson Marlborough and Tasman.
Uh, it is my view, uh, that goes back
to the 19th century when Marlborough got itself a divorce,
uh, from the Nelson Province.
That the huge mountain that separates, uh, Nelson,
the main range through the south island,
does not create the level of community of interest
to justify a single plan.
My view is that the Malborough District Council run a very
efficient, effective shop.
If I was looking at other areas, be it Taranaki or RA
or Hawke's Bay, in my view, Marlborough is one
of the most effective units of local government with urban
and town and a community
of interest in a single unitary council.
Now we are to further the conversation with Iwi, uh,
around the development of these new plans.
We are committed to working with them.
We think the partnership agreement we have them is a good
way, uh, of which, uh, to do it.
It, uh, there will be, um, tensions for us to work
through with them about
how we would structure the involvement.
You'll make our job a lot easier
if you adopt my suggested amendment
of a single Nelson Tasman plan.
'cause then we can quickly talk with our we about
how they would then have input into
that process. Thank you.
And Land Farm has a question just online now.
Oh, mayor Smith, thanks for your submission.
I wanted to ask you about the environmental limits part
of your submission because you're noting that, you know,
there's already significant cumulative effects in Nelson
and quite limited opportunities for growth.
And you talk about the goal
where it talks about life supporting capacity, unlikely
to be sufficient to protect ecosystem health over time.
Do you think because under this proposal, these, uh,
environmental limits will be
determined at the regional rather than the national level,
do you think that is an, uh, a good place to be?
Or do you think there should be sets
of environmental bottom lines at that national level
for environment, not just health?
Really complicated question
because whether you're dealing with questions of air quality
of water quality or biodiversity protection, uh,
we might take a different view.
My honest view of it is this.
We undersell the success
of the Resource Management Act over the last 35 years.
And the way it has dealt with point source discharge,
whether it be, if you took New Zealand 35 years ago
and you looked at the crap that we put into the air in the
water, uh, it has been a revolution.
The bit that is focused on in this part of our submission is
around the community effects.
And, and in my view, the RMA has not been successful
in dealing with the cumulative effects, uh, of a number
of our core environmental issues.
I think the way these bills are framed
as it will be an improvement on what we have in the RMA
and dealing with, and quite frankly, if you're dealing
with an issue like water quality,
it is not the point source discharge,
but the more diffuse pollution that's going
to impose the challenges over the life
of these new bills that you are considering.
Mm-hmm.
And just on that, 'cause you did raise water
and, uh, you know, water obviously, um,
security is really important in your region as well.
Nelson being a large, um, horticulture growing region.
I mean, the growers there would obviously want more
certainty in terms of those water consents too.
Yes, they do. And I hold quite a strong view
that it is not just the law that you are
and the bills that you are considering today,
but the structure of local government
that will have a key impact over whether we do better
in the next 30 years in the life of these laws
than we did over the last 30.
That is, um, it is by no coincidence
that the only council
that has been successful across New Zealand
and building substantive water infrastructure was a unitary.
I'm also incredibly proud
that the biggest improvements in air quality anywhere in
New Zealand has been achieved in my own city of Nelson.
Not because of my work, but I fundamentally believe
that unitary councils
where you don't have the local government community split,
provide the tools alongside the bills
that you are considering to actually be able
to deliver better both economic
and environmental outcomes, uh, will not surprise you.
I'm such a big fan of a unitary council,
but I do think, uh, in our part of the world,
there are good examples of where they've been,
uh, very successful.
And obviously the government, uh, is making changes
with the simplification of local government.
It is the bringing together of those two bills as well as
that simplification of local government
that offers New Zealand real opportunities to do better
for both the environment
and the economic development of regions like ours.
No, um, absolutely. Thank you Nick.
I think, uh, we will leave it there. We have met time.
Uh, we appreciate, uh, all your insights
and the submission today.
So, uh, appreciate it. We
Appreciate the opportunity. Good luck. This will
Be very familiar, this environment to you
after 31 years, too
Familiar, keen to get out the door.
Thank you. So now we will welcome
through our next submitter, uh,
the Taranaki Regional Council, uh,
who are joining us by Zoom today.
Hello. And, um, can you hear me?
Yes, we can welcome
to the select committee this afternoon.
We can see you and hear you.
We will, uh, hand it over to you. You have 20 minutes.
Uh, so if you'd like
to make some introductions, that would be great.
And then we'll open up for questions.
Thank you very much. Um, good afternoon.
I am Craig Williamson, the chair
of the Taranaki Regional Council.
Um, joining me today, we have Steve, our chief executive,
um, Abby Matthews, uh, head
of Environmental Science Department,
and finbar our strategy lead.
Today we'll speak to our view of the need for reform
outline that we see real promise in the bills,
and then focus on areas where improvement is needed.
Um, the Taranaki Regional Council has a long history
of delivering integrated environmental management
that balances economic and environmental outcomes.
Uh, voluntary riparian
and Hill country programs demonstrate
that good environmental outcomes
and economic performance are not mutually exclusive.
When the system is well designed and locally grounded.
These schemes have seen over 12,000 kilometers
of stream banks re-vegetated
and 253,000 hectares of hill country land
comprehensively mapped.
However, the current slow, uncertain,
and overly complex resource management system
is not serving us well.
So we strongly support the need for reform.
Our region is facing structural economic challenges
and the need to unlock investment while still protecting the
natural environment is vital.
These new bills can do that
and they will define the planning
and environmental system for decades to come.
To provide lasting positive change, we stress the need
for durable bipartisan support.
This is to avoid repeated reform cycles
that undermine confidence and increase costs.
Like what has happened
for freshwater management under the RMA.
So reform is to be durable and legitimate.
Also, it must respect the Treaty of Wai Tangi
and Maori rights and interests.
The bills currently do not do this.
The lack of an an operative treaty clause
and the pervasive undermining
of man's role in the resource management system is highly
concerning to us.
The bills as drafted risk unduly constraining our ability
to uphold the principles of the Treaty of Wang
and our local treaty settlements.
They would limit our ability
to continue the generally positive relationships developed
with local iwi and hapu.
More time is also needed to ensure a fair transposition
of the deep treaty settlement landscape here in Taranaki.
Despite these concerns
and other issues we raise in our submission,
we think the bills do have promise.
We want to thank the select committee for the opportunity
to speak today and look forward to seeing
how the process unfold.
I'll now hand to our chief executive Steve Rudo,
who will focus on the practical delivery
implications for councils.
You. Thank you, Craig.
One of the first concerns we want to, to raise is the lack
of alignment between resource management reform,
wider local government foreman,
and the proposed rates keeping regime.
In our view, these reforms are all interdependent
and need to be, uh, looked at in a,
in a coherent way as a complete package.
And with the sequencing, uh, of the well sequenced to ensure
that they are all realistic to to be implemented within,
within a reasonable timeframe.
You know, in our view, the resource management form in terms
of some of its timeframes is incredibly ambitious
and will be quite demanding, uh, of everybody in the sector
to, to be able to implement them within the
timeframes currently proposed.
So in our submission,
we suggest you create a phasing regime, uh,
to enable different councils to proceed
through the process at a different time.
Uh, to carry off the current timeframe is likely
to add significantly to the cost.
'cause you'll just create intensive competing pressures
for those limited resources that exist in a number of areas,
uh, and, and indeed, uh, drive up for costs
or the implementation process if you try and achieve that
or the one, one time.
Also really important to recognize the significant cost, uh,
for the implementation process.
I, you know, just observing me
and Nick Smith making some comments about these.
And indeed, if you at your own, uh,
cost benefit analysis suggesting around 800,
$900 million in development costs for implementing
of the regime, those issues that, uh, if they would come,
the scope of the rates proposed rates keeping regime would,
would drive major changes to levels of service, uh,
to enable those sorts of costs
to be funded in the, in the short to medium term.
So those cost pressures need to be, need to be well managed
and thought through in terms of the integration
between the legislation that's there.
Uh, reform at the local level must be, um, uh, able
to be appropriately implemented, uh,
and within, within the, uh, the race gaping regime.
While council wants to get moving with the implementation
of new system, we must also be allowed time
to actively engage with our communities
and key stakeholders, uh, throughout the regime.
Uh, and that's particularly important with,
with spatial planning where there will be a high level
of interest and, and ensure
and the outcomes that are being proposed to be delivered.
And, and it really important to get that buy.
And if we're not to set up a regime
that needs considerable rework in, in the future years.
Uh, so notification of the spatial plan
and a little more, uh, uh, six months
after the, uh, the royal ascent
and the release of a new national direction
and our view is, is limited
and we need extra time allowed for that.
Other key concerns that we'd like to see addressed is
that the, uh,
natural environment Bill provides a little room
for restoration, which is a key part of its purpose.
You know, we propose in our submission new goal to provide
for this, we focus on non-regulatory initiatives, which has,
and that non-regulatory approach has been a critical part
of the taranaki, what Scopely referred to
as the Taranaki way of achieving voluntary buy.
And, and, and one much, so much of the,
the good practical work that's been achieved in Taranaki
over the years is based on voluntary buy-in.
Uh, the focus on the minister resolving conflicts within the
goals increases the risk of policy instability, uh,
particularly when there are changes in governments.
Uh, as, as chair Craig has already, uh, commented,
we saw significant regular change in the freshwater NPS,
you know, we were in danger, we were close
to getting version four within about 11 years.
Uh, and we, we see it as really important
that there is bipartisan support
for the key platforms in the legislation
to give us some consistency
and actually allow us to get on
with implementing practical improvements on the ground.
Uh, uh, out in the regions, uh, regulatory relief,
uh, in our view could, uh, limit the ability
to meet some environmental limits, particularly in,
in regard to indigenous bio diversity
and breach of the treaty principle of, of active protection.
Uh, so we highlighted our submission, a number
of concerns about that current regime.
So it encourage you to have a close
look at that area as well.
The provisions around action plans
and muddled with a lack of coherence
between spatial planning action plans, caps on resource use
and natural environment plans.
Uh, you indeed, as currently drafted, the first spatial plan
was very, like, we cannot
before we legislatively compliant, uh,
because as some of the mandated matters come
and the subsequent natural environment plan, uh,
and so again, the need to have a good look at that linkage,
and if we are, if you are not going to change us
to let us get on with the environmental limits
before we can finalize a special plan, you need to recognize
that there will be breaches
of the special planning legislation in that first version,
which should also, uh, should also be fixed.
The other area we'd encourage you
to have a look at is the avalanche of consent renewals.
With the extension of all existing expiring consent terms,
we're now gonna have a huge mountain
of consents all expiring in a relatively similar timeframe,
which will put incredible pressure on the system as a whole,
uh, when they do come up for renewal in the future.
Uh, so we see addressing some of these issues as critical
for ensuring that the system's durable, workable
and trusted by communities.
We'd like to thank you for the opportunity to,
to speak today and very happy to take, uh,
any questions on points we've raised, uh, verbally
or any other matters within our submission. Thank you.
Thank you for that thorough submission.
Um, Rachel Brooking has a question. Yes, thank you.
I'm interested in your submission, um,
about transitional provisions
and you note how expensive consultants can be
and if they are all needed
to be used all at the same time all around the country, uh,
that will be difficult for councils.
Uh, and then you also suggest
that you have a interim spatial plan
and then a, the further spatial plan.
We've had a lot of submissions today say how important it is
that the environmental limits are set bef there
is a spatial plan.
Um, and then you flow on from that
and you talk about the flow on as well.
Is, is that something that you agree with
or you think it's better just to get on
with a rough spatial plan and then, um, continue from there?
We think there's pros and cons to both approaches.
Um, again, if you are wanting the councilors
to set environmental limits
before the spatial plan, um, that needs
to be time lined out in terms
of those transitional arrangements.
Setting environmental limits is no small job,
even if you're doing a subset of them just
for the spatial plan.
Um, our initial thinking was that if the goal is
to get this, get on with this, then treat
that first spatial plan as an interim one
and acknowledge that it'll be deficient in some areas,
but you have your best crack
and then you revisit it as soon
as you've got your natural environment plans
and, um, land use plans done.
So your pros and cons to either approach.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, look, we've got another question from Lan Farm
Koto. Thank you so
much again
for your very comprehensive submission.
I wanted to pick up particularly, uh, on your comments
to at the end there, Steve, about the actual implementation
where we've got potentially the backlog of consents
who have been given this extension out to 2027
or later, um, or coming potentially at once.
Can you just expand
for the committee what's actually happening there?
Because the consent
extension duration bill didn't actually come
to this committee, it went through right under urgency.
If you could explain that. Thank you.
Um, I can speak to that. Yeah.
So that bill, um, made it so any consent except
for a narrow subset of exemptions, any consent
that was coming up for renewal.
So in the coast case of us, for example, if someone is, um,
needs a consent to discharge farm dairy treated farm dairy
effluent to land or water, that consent comes up
for renewal periodically.
That bill, that act, um, just did a blank blanket extension
of all those consents until 2027.
And then I think the provisions in the bill as drafted
continue that extension until 20, 29
or five years or something.
So that, and that equates to hundreds
and hundreds of consents for us.
Um, and this was an issue
that actually came up in the labor government, um,
for different reason as well, bills.
But if you're just gonna have all those cents coming up
for renewal on the same date, that's,
that's impossible for us to manage.
So the proposal that we put forward is that you give
regional councils the extension, the ability to kind
of break those up into tranches so we can go,
like we break up our consents by catchment.
So we would go, okay, all
of your catchment ones are instead gonna expire on this
stage, so then we can stagger them kind of six months apart.
So we get a manageable flow in of consents, um, while still,
um, you know, giving effect to the, um,
I guess the intent in the bill
that those consents don't come in for renewal
until there's greater certainty of the legislative regime.
And then chair, can I just ask a supplement? Yes, yes.
Thank you. So then how does that work, like in terms of
regional council's planning?
Would you for example, that, is
that why you are saying you need really clear national
direction to be able to set those environmental limits at
that regional level so that when all those consents say tran
by tranche are decided,
you actually already have some clear limits?
Is that what, how it could potentially work?
Um, I think the, my understanding was that kind of from
what the draft provisions in the bill is that none
of those consents would come in for a renewal
until your natural environment plan
is notified or operative.
Um, and so you would have
to have the national direction in place
before that in terms of, or even draft your
natural environment plan.
So I think the proposal as we've drafted would be, um, the,
yeah, but none of those charges would start rolling in
until you've done your national natural environment plan.
So yes, you have to have the national direction sorted
and the sooner we have that,
just the sooner we can get
cracking on the whole thing, really.
Thank you. Um, look, I, um,
was quite interested in the comments made in the submission
around the relationship, um, with the funnel
and the key national instruments
and you saying you supported the funnel
and the, the process,
but you were concerned, I suppose, uh,
around potentially losing some kind of local control
that may be unique to Taranaki.
Um, just wondering kind
of whether you could give some examples of that uniqueness
to Taranaki and, and where that concern lies.
Um, yeah, so probably a great one for us
and is around sediment.
So the, we have an issue with, uh,
hill country, which is about half of the region
where we've done some modeling,
and maybe you can speak to this much better than I can,
but we've done some mod modeling that basically says, um,
if we covered the whole of the Hill country
and native vegetation,
we would still not meet the current limits for sediment
that are set, set in the national policy statement
for freshwater management.
Um, so it's just emphasizing the point
that when you're riding this national direction,
there will always be local circumstances that need to be
provided for to deviate from
and we need the ability to do that, that's
provided in the natural environment bill
through the justification reports that you've got to do.
I guess the thing we are raising
as well is if you're setting national direction
for the spatial plan, what's the process to allow us
to deviate from that set of national direction?
Because we are not really into just writing justification
reports yet.
Um, so just yeah, break when you break
that national direction up into two,
how we can appropriately deviate if needed.
Okay. No, thank you for that. Um, pre
Thanks.
Um, and thank you for your very comprehensive submission.
Uh, covers a fair bit of ground. I had two quick questions.
One was very similar to what Rachel has already asked
and from your response to her, um, would I be right in, um,
I guess taking from that that you're not too fussed about
the sequencing between environmental limits
and spatial planning, but are asking for more clarity, uh,
and perhaps stability from your written submission?
Correct. Look, well, we'll work with what we get given,
um, but the sooner we know
what we're gonna be given the better.
Okay. Um, so yeah, we'll make it work. Okay.
And my second question is, uh,
the point you've made in your written submission around, uh,
your concerns that public
participation is being limited at the top of the funnel, um,
and that that's not gonna work for the communities that you,
um, that you represent or you serve.
Just wondering if you wanted to expand on that.
You've made the point that plan making is quite different
from a consents process.
Um, yeah, just keen for a bit of an expansion on that point.
Uh, two, two points to make.
Um, one is that the reality is
most people in the community don't care about something
when you're drafting the plan.
They care about it when you are building something right
next to them or you are, it's like a, it's at
that consenting level where people are interested.
And that's just kind of a fact, I think of human nature.
Um, I love complicated spatial plans
and natural environment plans,
but they're not the easiest things for people to grasp.
Um, so the funnel can work,
but it does mean that you really gotta put the effort in to
that public engagement, realizing that you're kind
of up against it towards
what the average person really wants to engage in.
Um, so that's one of our concerns.
And then, uh, in terms of the funnel as well,
and this comes down to the transitional arrangements of
when you are needing to put the first tranche
of national direction together really quickly, some
of the transitional provisions fundamentally kind
of undermine the funnel
'cause you're not given enough time to engage
with the communities on what
that national direction should be.
The classic one, which is not highlighted in our submission,
but in the one is that there's an exemption
for iwi participation in the first tran
of national direction.
Um, which just fundamentally cuts against the purpose
of the funnel if you're not taking the time to do it.
Right.
Okay. Thank you. Look, thank you very much
for your submission today and taking the time.
Appreciate your time and, uh, yeah, lots to consider there.
So thank you.
Thank you. Cool. So now we will welcome
through our next submitter.
Uh, the Auckland Council are also joining us,
uh, via Zoom
Kilda. Can you hear me?
Kilda? Yes. Welcome
to the Select committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us.
Uh, we do have your submission, uh, well two very,
very large comprehensive, uh, detailed submissions.
So we thank you for all of the time
that you have put into that.
Uh, and we really look forward to hearing from you and,
and talking us through those two submissions.
And then we'll open it up to questions. So over to you.
Good. Uh, chair and Koto, um, to panel members.
I mean, the committee members. Sorry.
Um, thank you for the opportunity for us
to present on behalf of council.
Um, this submission is be on behalf
of the Go Body of the Council.
Uh, Tam Koto Auckland is home to a third of New Zealanders.
And as unitary authority,
we have deep experience integrating land use,
environmental management infrastructure, climate adaptation,
and working in partnership with mana.
We support well-designed reform and welcome clear
and national direction, integrated plans
and stronger enforcement tools.
However, as drafted, these bills pose significant risks
to environment, environmental protection, local democracy,
and the integrity, integrity of the
TGI within the planning system.
Uh, first focus is local democracy.
Uh, the bills shift councils from decision makers
to implementers while giving ministers of the current
and future governments broad and largely unchecked powers.
This does reduce accountability to local communities
and creates uncertainty for direct decision making.
You will also have heard from Mayor Wayne Brown
that the sort of obsession with national direction
or national consistency comes at the cost of local
and even regional nuance and needs.
Uh, the removal of the treaty principles clause is a major
step backward in our opinion,
and it weakens the recognition of Maori rights,
cultural landscapes, kaga,
and longstanding partnership expectations.
It also sits at odds with the council's commitments
to work in a manner consistent with.
And yes, there are protections for treaty settlements,
but it does feel like this is sort of the implementation
of the treaty principles bill.
But through different leg legislation, uh,
the regulatory relief scheme, uh,
we believe this is unworkable and environmentally harmful.
And Auckland's more than 65,000 hectares
and around 28,000 properties could be eligible.
This creates huge financial exposure for all rate payers
and perverse incentives for the council
to avoid protecting significant, significant natural areas,
native forest streams and waterways.
Heritage, um, sites of significance to Maori, uh,
further weakening cultural
and ecological values guaranteed under ity.
Also, if the system is retrospective rate,
payers will be funding windfall gains to property owners
who will have bought property over the last few decades
with the knowledge that they had a significant eco
ecological area, sorry, um,
native bushel stream on their property and their rates
and their value of that property would've already been
factored into that at the time.
Um, the mayor has also been clear this could easily breach
any future rate cap provisions as well.
System design, um, separating land use
and natural environment legislation breaks
integrated planning.
It creates duplicated consenting pathways,
potentially slower processes, unclear
and insufficiently aligned infrastructure, funding
and financing mechanisms, um,
and potentially unworkable timeframes.
There's currently no indication
that infrastructure funding settings are being developed
alongside the new planning system, uh,
which reduces confidence
that the councils will be actually able
to deliver the outcomes the system anticipates.
We need early national direction,
including environmental limits on
how the growth decisions will be
supported with that infrastructure.
Um, Auckland Council supports reform,
but we need a system that honors ity,
protects the environment
and provides clear integrating funding pathways.
Um, we don't believe the bills achieve that at the moment.
Uh, enabling development
and infrastructure must not override environmental quality
without clearer prioritization
or stronger national direction.
And there's a risk that economic development objectives may
override environmental and community considerations.
Um, I'll just quickly go down to, uh,
narrowing matters Under the planning bill works against the
efficiency of a combined plan, especially
for planning matters of common relevance.
This rigid, rigid rigidity, rigidity, sorry,
will prevent Thank you.
Council here, um, will prevent effective planning
for infrastructure and natural hazards in particular.
For example, a narrow forecast
forecast on safeguarding communities from the effects
of natural hazards may prevent incorporation of measures
to mitigate the effects of climate change and plans.
Just give a couple of last bullet points.
Um, we believe the select committee must reinstate
a treaty principles clause, um,
with guidance on implementation, remove
or significantly revise the regulatory relief, um, system
restore integrated planning,
retain strong design quality tools, ensure clear
and aligned infrastructure, funding
and financing mechanisms, um, are aligned
and provide realistic timeframes and full national direction
before the planning begins.
Um, without these changes, the bill may lead to, well,
will lead to worse environmental outcomes.
We can treaty partnerships
and potentially a less workable planning system,
which I think we would all agree is not the aim, um,
that any of us would like, or what,
what the government is trying to do either.
So, um, JDA
and we're happy anytime to, um, catch up help and sit together.
I've spoken to Minister Bishop about a number
of things, um, in here too.
So, uh, we've got really good relationships
and conversations in with him.
So we are, we are here to help as well
as, um, give our feedback.
So, Hilda.
Hilda, thank you. Uh, right.
We will go to Rachel Brooking for the first question.
Thank you. Um, uh, I'll, I'll keep it
to one, but I've got another one.
I put my hand up again for the next one.
But to start with, uh,
we've talked a lot on the select committee about
intensification in Auckland and,
and had various different, um, bills come
before us within giant, um,
amendments at the committee stage,
and then talk of them changing again.
So, council is currently involved in Plan Change one 20.
How do you see that, um, plan change to fit
with this new legislation and if you were drafting it?
Yeah, thank you. Um, Rachel, the, um,
and thank you for contacting me about this before,
and I have also had a good discussion
with Minister Bishop about this.
I think, you know, we are keen, uh, to update
and redo our spatial plan anyway.
Um, the Auckland plan is a really good, uh, system,
so it's great that that will be required across the country.
So spatial planning is good, I guess for us.
'cause we have taken our community
through Plan Change 78 now plan Change one 20
that obviously the government wants to slightly change
what we're doing, again, in that space with our, you know,
we want flexibility there.
But I think finishing that in the middle of next year
and then potentially going straight back into another, um,
significant planning regime will probably
not be the best outcome.
So we want, we do want to update the plan
to match the, the new laws.
Um, and there will be things
that aren't in plan change one 20 that we want to change,
but I guess, um,
and the minister sort of in conversation has said, yes,
we need to find a pathway through for Auckland
because we've already sort of got a big convey about
of plans and things, um, already set up.
So it's just how we nuance what we can do.
Not because Auckland's special, like some people, um,
won't like that, but, but I think so we can,
Auckland is special.
Okay, well, I believe Auckland's special,
but I know that's not what, um, everyone, uh, might think.
But I think, you know, we, we have done a huge amount.
We've already spent about $14 million in the last two plans.
Uh, we don't wanna go straight back into planning if we,
if we can help it.
So a spatial plan, yes, but the combined plan
and a new unitary plan, um, straight away might not be good.
But updating provisions, updating zones,
which may likely be like Auckland zones anyway, potentially.
Um, we're happy to do, but let's work on the nuance together
because I think we want the same outcomes.
Great. Thanks Richard. Thank you.
Uh, we'll go to Grant McCollum now.
Yes. Yeah. Um, good day. Thank you for your presentation.
Um, uh, just a query around the,
uh, regulatory relief stuff.
How do you, okay, you've obviously got your concerns there.
How do you deal with the situation then by
where if the council comes along
and says, I'm a farmer by back as background
and said, we're gonna, uh, put restrictions on what you can,
you can do on your property to protect Bush and this
and that and all the other stuff,
and lowers the value slash lowers the income, the income.
If, um, someone can earn off their property,
how do you deal with that?
Yeah, so I think there are things we already do.
So incentives, we work with, um,
rural property owners on things like planting, helping
with planting, things like that.
But, um, I guess
because we already have such a good regime in place
for decades that, that a lot of this may be retrospective.
So people will be purchasing
or have purchased property a long time ago
with the knowledge that they can't build over that stream
or build necessarily in that wetland.
Um, so it's about, I guess, the system
that looks forward and goes, yes.
Um, how do we work with that property owner?
Um, obviously rates are lower in a place that can,
in a property that can develop it less.
So that's already the case. So if you've got a single house
zoning, um,
your rates will be less than a property that can go to six stories.
So that's already kind of a factor.
You're already being, um,
paying rates based on the capital value.
But I, I, I've spoken to the minister on this again too,
and it's like how I understand that
for large rural property owners potentially,
but I think if you look at every single property across
urban Auckland mm-hmm.
You might have per, um, perverse outcomes, if we just, um,
say now no longer we do, we look at protecting streams
or protecting, um, stands of trees, um,
it might change things quite significantly.
Also, if people have bought a property, because it has,
and we have this a lot in my community,
they buy a property hard up against an SCA
because they don't wanna be built up.
They, they want to have these trees backing onto the
reserve, et cetera,
but then suddenly they, they qualify for, uh, uh,
additional payments even though they like to live there.
You could have people gaming that system.
So I guess it's just, once again, trying to figure out
what is the best way forward.
Um, especially, you know, going through,
there might be some examples of where a owner
of a property may feel that's unfair going forward.
And so how do you work that out?
Yeah, but we don't know what the payments might look like
and how, you know, as such a huge, um, city what
that will look like for the rate payers.
'cause that money will be coming out of all rate payers.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, look, we'll go to Julianne Genta now,
Your counselors.
Thank you so much for your submission.
I have a few questions.
Um, I wanted
to know if you think there's a lot in the submission about
not having two bills, uh,
but turning it into one, how important do you think that is?
Um, obviously a lot
of work has been done to have two separate bills.
So like how critical is that?
Um, and then I wanted, there's some interesting case study
in the submission about, um, private plan changes
enabling development where there is no infrastructure.
And I just was wondering if you could comment on amendments
to the planning act that might assist to ensure
that you don't get this out of sequence development
through the private plan change process?
Yeah. Um, first question, I mean, I, I, we think two,
two bills is okay, as long
as when you come out the other end
that we have a clear direction, someone comes to us
with a consent and it's clear what, what bill it's aiming at
or what the purpose is.
I guess if it comes together as one system,
then we'll probably be okay,
but at the moment it feels a bit like they're competing.
Um, and, and, and once again,
we don't wanna make this even harder for applicants, harder
for the council, harder for infrastructure providers.
So, um, you know, ultimately if it was brought in together
as two parts or something, that would be more helpful.
But I, I think it's just trying to figure out, you know,
staff will have to be measuring against two things
on private plan changes.
I dunno if there's a silver bullet here,
but I don't think people, the community
nor governments have either, um, you know,
the last government of current government necessarily
understand what these private plan changes do,
especially to Auckland.
So we may have a plan change come out of nowhere,
private plan change, it goes through the process,
suddenly thousands of, um, homes open up, uh, in an area
that we had no plan for water infrastructure, no plan
for roads, no plan, and we just have to redirect.
Um, so then you may have areas in urban Auckland
that don't have the access to the, um,
upgraded infrastructure
because that money is now being put over
to a new greenfield area that wasn't in our plans.
So it's not like we're opposed to private plan changes,
but it does mean that we're constantly chasing our tail.
And the, the community expects that we are putting money
and time into the areas that are currently being built up,
but we can't, we're constantly like whiplash, um, being sent
to different parts of the city that weren't planned yet,
and we're talking billions that we don't have planned
for the areas that suddenly open up.
Um, and most of that's coming from current rate payers.
We can only at the moment charge a small amount
to developers of that overall cost.
Can I just add in there if it's okay? Yeah.
Um, some of this is about some of the timeframes in the,
and the big amounts of money involved.
So we've got the supporting growth alliance work,
which is looking out 30 years for a range
of different infrastructure investments,
including water and transport.
And then a private plan change potentially comes in over the
top of that and we have to redirect to meet that need
as opposed to chugging on with something that, you know,
has been planned for years, people know is coming in years,
suddenly boom, something pops up.
So some of this is about just the reality of the timeframes
and the large amounts of money we are talking
about in the Auckland context,
I guess, um, would it be better if it was clear in the
legislation that the council has the right
to turn down a private plan change
on that base, on that basis?
Uh, yeah, definitely.
O often we end up leaning on water care
who then get the flame because they say, actually, yep,
you've got your plan change, but we cannot let you connect.
And that might not be about money.
That might be actually actually about gravity.
Yeah, so we've got pipes
or a, a far-flung suburb starting, you know, hun few hundred
or even over a thousand that actually can't connect
to the system 'cause of gravity.
So you need essentially everyone to turn to arrive at
that development on day one and turn on the taps
or turn on, start flushing the toilets
to make the whole system work.
And then we get complaints about shipping out, um,
wastewater and trucks to, to the other part
of Auckland, et cetera.
So, which is not an optimum, um,
situation, optimal situation.
Great, thank you. Uh, look, we'll go
to Cameron Luxton now for a question.
Oh, Thank you chair. Uh, thank you councilor, you, you,
you raised in your beginning of your submission there, um,
a concern about Maori interest being taken into account.
But I mean, isn't it, isn't it the legislation
that's being proposed here pretty clear on the role
for Maori in the new system,
like being consulted on national instruments and plans
and, uh, being able to, um, identify salts sites
of cultural significance.
So I mean, what, what, but
We don't know what else. So,
so, so what else? So the question is,
what else do you think, um, should be
provided for for Maori interests?
Yeah, the, the, the current legislation
and has for decades
and decades allowed Maori to, um,
have an interest in the environment generally
and water generally, uh, on large infrastructure projects.
Um, most of the, in my experience,
has been a very positive, um, focus.
This will largely focus on settlement related.
There are iwi in Auckland who do not have settlements,
who will not technically be able
to comment on things happening in the areas that may be part
of their settlement in the future.
I guess it is sort of taking away the voice
that has been part of, um, planning for,
for decades and decades.
So, so your concern isn't that there's a lack, uh,
there's a lack of provision.
It's just the identification of those who can provide that,
um, consultation advice?
Well, yeah, it, it does remove their voice from,
from things that are standard in practice
that we would normally go to Mano.
And we, we've got really good relationships in all parts
of the council with Mana.
But that would, that tension, yes, we could still talk
to them, but it will no longer be, uh, uh, you know,
they won't be enabled to, to speak on that yes.
That they've got land or settlement land, yes.
But it kind of takes away the whole treaty provision of, of
that partnership model that we've had for Auckland
and since before I was born.
So off the top of your head, um, you can't think
of anything, is that what here,
What was that? Sorry, what? Uh,
So I mean, we've got national instruments like the
development of national instruments and plans
and the identification of culturally significant sites.
Was there anything else you could think of
that's not being, uh,
Provided? It's not clear how
they will, how it's not clear
through the national instruments, how Manoa
or iwi groups could identify, um,
culturally significant sites.
Um, and, and it would, I assume go
through the private plan change process that we have now.
And if you think about it, we protect two, two
and a half thousand, um, homes.
Uh, but with only 120 um, sites, you know, if you think
of heritage buildings versus Maori heritage,
it's actually quite a slow, um, process to,
to identify these sites.
Right. Look, we'll
Move on to another question.
Um, LA Farm
Ua, thank you for your submission.
Um, I just wanted to pick up on a very clear
point that you were making,
and you talked about the purpose of the bill
and how it should be more emphatically about the protection
and enhancement of the natural environment.
And then you go on to say that as currently drafted,
the goals do not deliver on the protection
or enhancement of the natural environment.
And you are particularly talking about the natural
environment that were here.
What do you think the implications are?
Because, you know, this bill has just been essentially
rushed through, uh, in the, in the next few months,
and we've got a very limited time as a committee
to actually work on it.
What do you think the implications are if we just simply
don't make changes to actually protecting
and enhancing the environment?
What would that mean for Tamaki?
Well, I mean, specific, uh,
our community expect us to protect the environment.
It's the number one thing. I'm the,
I'm a counselor for the North Shore.
It is how are you protecting our coast?
How are you protecting our beaches?
How are you protecting our trees?
How are you protecting our, and this comes from all parts
of our community, young, um, lower income, high income.
Why are you not protecting all these things if, um,
and we are, you know, pro development, pro housing,
pro infrastructure, but if you are only, if that is the aim
and, and it loses way
and you're not protecting the streams that lead down
to tuck Puna Beach, you're not protecting the coastline
that people love or you're not protecting the Leroy's Bush
or the amazing, um, Cody Bush
as we have say on the North Shore, just,
but that's is across Auckland,
then I think you're losing the important things
that people love about Sam Makoto.
And we're spending a lot of money on things that's
cept all these things.
If it's just council following our, uh, our tail
and fixing things by infrastructure while making it worse.
Um, on the other hand, sediment being a huge one.
Um, you know, we've got seafood, um, sorry,
sea life being ruined by by sediment
because the controls are not meeting
what climate change is doing to, you know,
run off and things like that.
If, if, if that kind of mix is not met,
then you don't get the good infrastructure
or you don't get the good community
and environmental outcome.
So it's not choosing one over the other,
but it's looking at both as assets for the city.
Like a, you know,
we're opened the Moan Festival on SAT Saturday morning,
this is all about boats on the harbor,
people on the Harbor Sail GP the week before.
If we degradate our environment more
and more, we actually don't get the positive outcomes
on the other side for the city.
So it's not about being anti-development infrastructure,
it's just making sure we look at both
while we're doing these things.
And as we saw in 2023, we saw billions of dollars worth
of damage, that if we'd actually had environmental lens on
some of the building that went into place, or the roads
or the housing, then we actually wouldn't have had
the cost on rate payers
and taxpayers to fix all that stuff, um,
if we'd actually thought about the environment early on.
Look, thank you Richard.
We are going to have to leave it there. We have met time.
Uh, we appreciate, thank you very much.
Appreciate those, uh, very in depth submissions
and I'm sure there would be plenty more questions,
but, um, you know, members can feel free
to reach out at any point.
So thank you very much for Thank you for the questions.
So now we welcome our next submitter,
which is the Voluntary Heritage Group, who are also,
uh, here.
Thank you. Uh, not online.
Good to see you refreshingly, uh, in the room.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes,
you have 20 minutes with us.
Um, take your submission as read, uh,
but we'll hand it over to you for the opening remarks
and then we'll open up questions.
Very good. Thank you very much and good to see you again.
Um, Madam Chair
and members of the committee, we have hopefully some
of our members from around the country on the Zoom call
and, um, hopefully able to contribute to some of the answers
of if, uh, ne Um, so my name is Philip Barry.
I'm the convener of the national, uh,
voluntary Heritage Group.
Um, with me is Mark Blackham from Blackland Associates, uh,
PR advisors, and Ben Shen, a proud
TER property owner,
and also head, I hope to share a brief presentation
with you if the technology will allow us.
So we'll just try that. Can't hear.
Does he have the right to share?
Perhaps could one of you help us if needed be?
Um, Neil should, Neil should be able to share.
Feel free to help us if you, like
You able to, um, perhaps facilitate the sharing
of the presentation.
I can share it on my screen
For you. Okay. I think you've
got a copy,
Haven't you? It might just be
easier that way. Perfect.
Um, to keep things moving.
Okay. So while we're, we're waiting,
yes, I'll keep moving, shall I?
Yes. So who is the Volunteer Heritage Group?
So we are a nationwide group of affected homeowners,
people who's had the misfortune of having their property
identified as supposedly a heritage value
and ending up bearing a whole lot of pain, stress,
grief as a result.
Um, we don't think that's the intention of the legislation,
but it is very much the reality of the current regime.
Um, we support voluntary heritage designations.
That is our homes being designated
with the agreement of the owner.
We do not support compulsory designation
where a council just picks out your home.
And at the end of the day, you have no say as
to whether it's heritage designated or not.
We've lived the costs, the stress, the uncertainty
of having your home, having to go through a whole lot
of extra hoops, planning consents,
and the value of our homes falling by thousand,
hundreds of thousands of dollars.
So we believe if heritage is being preserved
for the public good, at the end of the day,
it's the public that should pay.
So what are the problems with the current regime?
In a nutshell, there's four fundamental problems.
Firstly, enormous costs imposed on the property owner
having to get a consent to do simple things
that change the exterior of our house,
let alone doing modern on things like putting in double
glazed windows or putting in a roof, a solar roof panel,
taking down a chimney, all those things.
You know, you and I would expect to be able to do
that without us having to go through additional consents.
But for the people whose homes been targeted
as heritage, that's not possible.
They have to pay higher insurance premiums,
and most importantly, the value of their home declines
probably by about 10 to 30% on average.
That's huge. You talk to any valuer,
they would tell you it's much more difficult to sell a home
that is listed as heritage.
Also, the indirect effects on other people,
on the young first home buyers.
When a property in Central Wellington, for example,
like the Gordon Wilson Flats, is just sitting there
derelict, unused for over 10 years, what happens
to the affordability of housing in this country?
But that's the type of system that we are running.
So it's a, it's really is a perverse system, Madam chair.
And the most perverse system of all is the fourth point.
It's not even protecting our heritage.
What are we doing here? There are properties all
around the country.
The Chateau was blocked up, unable
to be used in the Rupa district.
Um, other properties like Antonio Hall
and Christchurch St.
Dominic's in Dun, the BRI of bars,
these are all heritage stage.
They ca class one or class two,
but they are rundown, derelict.
The system's just not working. Why is that?
It's very simple. The incentives
are, are all wrong.
We missed that one. Keep going.
But yeah, the incentives are all wrong.
Council's designated property as heritage.
They seem to be doing the good thing, all fine and dandy,
but they are not bearing the costs.
They get the benefits, but don't bear the costs.
The public get the benefits. They don't pay either.
The one who bears the cost is the individual homeowner,
and they get none of the benefits.
It's perverse.
And the, the good thing is, well, sorry,
let me just give you a couple of examples of, of houses
that are heritage listed or proposed to be heritage listed.
The ones on the left are from Lower Hut, where I live
plan change, 56.
A couple of years ago, the local council wanted to add
around 350 extra homes.
And these, I joke, I kid you not, these are real examples
of homes that the council wanted to list as heritage.
Is that what we want to protect? What are we doing here?
Same in Hamilton, Mr.
Mr. Hamilton from Hamilton, you know, the situation there
some 2000 homes
and they weren't, they're not stately mansions.
These are just ordinary run of the mill,
you know, workers homes.
It's, and why are we preserving these
and making our homes unaffordable for young people?
This is not a good system.
So we have this opportunity with the planning bill
to change things, to fix things, to put it right.
Are we, are we, does it work?
Honestly, I do not think so at all.
There's a small positive improvement.
Use the adding of the word. Oh yeah.
Adding of the next slide. Thanks guys.
There's the adding of the word significant
before historic heritage.
That that's, that's good.
So we've raised the bar a little bit.
I think that's in, um, clause 11. Clause 11 of the bill.
But, um, yeah, cause limit the goals that the fundamental,
uh, part of the act, adding the word heritage.
But then when you dig into the detail,
nothing much else has changed.
And in particular, councils can still
impose heritage without the owner's consent.
In fact, you can argue they're obligated to,
I'm not blaming the councils.
It's the legislation.
It's the planning bill that will require them to, to fill,
fulfill that goal.
Yes, there is the regulatory relief provision,
but that is fundamentally flawed.
It does little more than the status quo.
It doesn't say how much compensation, it doesn't say
how the calculate compensation to be calculated.
There's nothing about full and fair compensation.
It's really a clause without any teeth at present.
I listened to the, the previous speaker,
the Auckland Council, talk about
some of the problems with it.
I agree. It shouldn't be retrospective.
I think that would be a, would be flawed
because people can buy a heritage home
at the discounted value.
They'd get a winful gain if we then
see they get compensation.
So I think that's silly. But for any new listing
where you're gonna impose a a, a new listing on a owner,
they should be compensated
and that compensation should be full and fair.
Um, a, a question there, Madam Chair, you're looking
No, I'm just listening and taking it in.
I'll wait till the end while ask question.
Carry on going through.
No, very thank you very much.
Um, so look, sum up, we have three
simple recommendations to the committee.
This is the good news, if you like.
Changing the bill to achieve
what we think is required is not hard,
just needs one simple change actually, which is to add in
that listing heritage designation can only occur
with the owner's agreement.
In other words, protect the property rights.
Do what you set out to do at the beginning of this process
and make the system fair so that if, if there is a public,
good public pay,
if you don't want that, if
that voluntary agreement is somehow not acceptable, then,
then there's two other things that we think are required.
Look, point number two there.
It should only be Heritage New Zealand
that can recommend properties being heritage value.
Don't leave it up to the councils.
They don't have the expertise
and please don't do what we do currently.
Where my neighbors can say my house is, is heritage.
That's, that's just wrong.
And then the last point that schedule three part four
change the name, don't call it regulatory relief.
It's relief is, is temporary and it's partial.
It's like giving some, cutting off someone's arm
and giving them a Panadol.
We don't want relief, we want compensation that's full
and fair because only then do the
councils face the right incentives.
Then they get the benefits and they pay the cost.
Me the owner, I bear the cost,
but at least I'm getting compensated for it.
What is wrong with that?
So thank you and I'm sure I'll leave it there.
Um, welcome any questions that you have.
Thank you. Um, we'll start with Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks. Jude two from Hamilton.
Two quick questions for you.
Um, yeah, and I sympathize with,
um, a lot of what you've said.
Um, I'm trying to extract
where you'd give us direction in terms
of the bill as it stands.
If I hear you correctly, it's, it's
around the regulatory takings thing.
You think that's that's an opportunity Yes.
But you think it needs to be expanded more
or I guess in your words, you talked about clearer
standards, like it's, it's quite unclear as to
how councils might interpret it,
what relief they might offer, that sort of
Thing. Absolutely.
Look, we've looked at
that schedule long and hard.
And to be honest, in our view,
it does nothing more than the status quo.
It just has a principles
that say there should be some relief.
It doesn't say how much relief
or even how it's to be calculated.
So if I was a council, I'd say, fine, you know, I'll do
what I do now, which is, take Hut City for example,
they have a fund a hundred thousand dollars to cover
300 plus houses, each of which is probably in incurrent
of cost of a hundred thousand dollars.
So it's token relief. It's not real.
We need a simple clause
and we, we suggested change that schedule
and just simply add in words that the relief framework
must provide for monetary compensation
that is full and fair.
Okay. My second question, if I could quickly,
and I hope you don't mind me asking, what was the genesis
for your group forming?
You're obviously very passionate about this
and often heritage groups on the
other spectrum from yourselves.
Mm-hmm. So I'd love to know what you
Know. Absolutely.
It's been interesting process.
I got involved, I think about 15 years ago when my house
was identified by the council as being of heritage value.
We put, we had to engage, um, a register architect.
We had to engage a planner.
We had to spend thousands of dollars to demonstrate
that actually it's just an ordinary home happened to have.
One of the reasons it was given by, it was heritage
was back in 1910, the Deputy chief inspector
of State coal mines lived there.
Right. I joke you not, I mean,
every house in the valley had some public servant
live in them at some stage.
So anyway, that was the genesis for me.
We, we brought together the community.
The councils are good at bringing communities together.
Um, and, and then though we got a, we got a tape approached,
we've set up a website, had great help from, from Mark,
which provided basically free.
Um, and then we set up a website
and we got approached by people in similar
situations from all around the country.
Sure. Thank you. You know, Dunedin, Hamilton,
gray Town, Napier.
So just a supplementary on that.
Um, so how many kind
of properties do you feel are in this boat,
basically at the moment that have nowhere to go room to move
to the point of the pictures that you showed?
Yeah, it's, it's hard
to get a total answer thing.
We've done a survey of all the councils
and we asked them how many,
and we've looked on their websites.
It ranges from like Wellton city council,
which has hundreds, maybe thousands.
Auckland Council didn't even know how many they had,
so we couldn't answer them.
Um, and then you've got some councils though
that don't designate any in total, I would say
well over two, two to 3000 in the country, possibly,
probably more like 10,000.
Okay. And that's this's existing.
And then Adam Hamilton recently added another 2000.
And then who knows? I mean, it's, it never stops. So,
And have you done any surveying around the cost of
that? Yes. Ified
That? Absolutely.
Yeah. Yeah.
There's, there's good empirical published evidence on that,
and it's in our submission,
but the real cost is the decline
in the value of the property.
And the estimates are
between an Auckland study done a couple years ago on
average, 10% declining in the value of the property.
So if you've got a million dollar home,
that's a hundred thousand dollars just written off.
And then some studies suggest up to 30% on average.
Yeah. Um,
Grab, so it's, yeah. Sorry.
So it's, you know, to compensate with
that, of course is not cheap.
Yeah. Yeah. But the cost is real. Someone's gonna bear it.
Mm. Um, grant McCullum has a question.
Yeah. Just quickly. So you,
you are quite unusual in the sense that you are the bad.
I think you must be the first person that's come on here
and said you like the regulatory relief concept.
You just don't think it's quite Got it.
It's quite good enough. Um, so I've,
I'm quite intrigued myself as a landowner
and seeing neighbors in the farming sense, having to,
having had, uh, that their properties impacted,
not heritage, but same principles.
So effectively all you are really wanting is actually the,
a system that makes it, if it's a heritage building,
that's gotta be a genuine heritage building.
Not just, well this suburb
or that group of houses are put by putting actual, uh,
focus on the council to say,
it's gonna cost us a lot of money.
Is it really heritage? Is
that basically the bottom line here for you?
Exactly. You know, we're not,
please don't misunderstand.
We are not anti heritage at all.
We are pro heritage, real heritage, real national heritage.
And if it is real national heritage,
then shouldn't the taxpayer
or the rate payer be paid to pay for it?
Yeah. It's a good test. If they're not,
then really where's the value?
Yeah. Thank you. Well, thank you very much
for your time today.
Lots of, uh, you know, good points there
and, uh, yeah, lots of considerations to take on board,
but we thank you for your time and your submission
and for your work in this space.
Thank you very much. And look
forward to seeing the revised bill.
Yeah.
And so we welcome our, uh, next submission, uh,
the Greater Wellington Regional Council who are all here.
Welcome to this committee this afternoon.
Great to have you with us.
And thank you for your submission.
Uh, take it as read,
but please, um, open up with some introductions
and, uh, oversight of the submission.
So we'll hand it over to you.
Kira, uh, COAD, Adrian Staples ua. I'm Adrian Staples.
I'm the Deputy Chair of Greater Wellington Regional Council,
and I have on my left councilor Quentin Duffy.
He's the chair of our Environment and Climate Committee.
And Richard Shields, who is one of our senior, um,
RMA advisor staff.
And in the back row that,
that this is the props in the h****r, the back row.
We have, um, uh, more senior staff who are here
to answer technical questions that Quentin
and I, um, aren't able to answer.
They can, they can probably find table,
you can pop pop up to the table if you'd like.
'cause if you, uh, need the microphones, um,
we have got some space here for you
to be involved at the table there.
Thank you. It's not my intention to,
to read a big statement.
You, you have our submission.
I will make some high level comment as will my, uh,
colleague here.
And then we've got time for you to answer questions, uh,
to answer questions for you.
Uh, as I believe that there are some in the, often
now we've got legislation coming to at us, left, right
and center, as I know many organizations
have already told you.
But I think the one in front
of us today is legacy legislation.
It's, it's going
to determine New Zealand's place as a great place
to live, work, and play.
And together we can. And we must get this right.
We're not going to have,
if our environment ends up the worse off
because of this legislation,
we can't send it back and get another one.
So I think it is really important that between us all, um,
we do the very best we can to make sure we come out of this
with something that's going to, to work for us.
Now I've been around local government for a long time, uh,
24 years for my Sins Community Board Mayor Regional Council.
I'm an RMA commissioner.
So I've seen RMA working and not working,
and regional council agrees that it, um,
it isn't working for us now.
It's not serving us well. And it's cumbersome.
Uh, it's costly, it's slow, and it's complex.
So we are, are all for reform,
but we can't support the bill in its current form.
And we have some reasons for this,
as we've outlined in our submission.
But there are some, um, particular points that we would like
to go over today.
Now the first one is with regards to TI
and the fact that the bill shifts away from a
TI consistent system.
And I would like to hand over to my colleague
to make some further comments.
Thank you, Adrian. Um,
so from Greater Wellington's perspective,
the current system is imperfect,
but it has had enough clarity to allow a very positive, um,
and partnerships that have been beneficial to,
to all in terms of, uh, restoring
and protecting public values,
like improving water quality in our region,
breathing life back into lake wider upper and, and so on.
The, uh, regardless of the outcome
of these bills, Maori rights and interest remain
and treaty settlements remain.
And so it's very important for planning certainty
and smooth transition to the new system
that these are clear under the new bills.
Treaty settlements are between Iwi
and the Crown, not between iwi and regional councils,
but we are required to, to implement them
through our legislative frameworks.
Um, and so we have made a number of specific provision, uh,
recommendations to, um, make it workable
and carry on the positive, uh, partnership
and, uh, treaty settlement redress that
that has been possible in the Wellington region, including,
uh, reinstating a, uh, an equivalent part two provision, uh,
and a treaty clause, uh, recognizing rights
and interests of Maori, which is so important, freshwater,
um, and geothermal as well.
Uh, not so much in the Wellington region,
we haven't found any yet,
but freshwater, particularly here, um, the, the need for iwi
to be included in the development
of the first national standards, which are so important
for directing us as a regional council about
how we go about planning for, uh,
public values in this region.
Um, and in, in particular, based on treaty settlements
between the Crown and Iwi, we have structures
and mechanisms, including our natural Resource planning
committee is actually, um, prescribed in legislation now.
Uh, and it has produced a natural resources plan under the
RMA framework that is effectively the result
of treaty settlement.
So for that to disappear in the new system, uh,
creates a great problem for regional council in, in, um,
and for iwi,
and I would argue for the Crown in terms of its, um,
settlement obligations and, and, um,
And a potential legal risk there, Adrian.
Okay. Uh, one of the areas we support, uh,
is mandatory regional spa, spatial planning.
Uh, we also, our regional council has
to deliver on public transport infrastructure.
And probably one of the, the biggest costs
to us is willy-nilly development that then needs, uh,
support from public transport and then people complain
because costs go up.
So as far as we are concerned, regional spatial planning
with regards to infrastructure as well as public transport,
it's, it's imperative
and a more integrated planning system where spatial plans,
land use and natural environments, um, plans align.
I think it's really important that often we,
we hear about development
and environmental, um, standards as, as if they're
alien to one another.
But I'd just like to remind us all that the world
when they're buying our products are looking towards
a country that produces its products in a sustainable
manner, especially our primary produce.
So I think it's really important that we look at
that when we are looking at our, at our planning,
our environmental regulations and our spatial plan.
Sorry for that, uh, for urban development.
So another area of our concern is the speed
and sequencing of the new system.
Um, while local governments contending
with an awful lot coming at it at, at the moment, we need
to get this bill right.
We've made some suggestions in our, uh, in our submission
with regards to speed and sequencing.
And we'd, uh,
really be very grateful if you could look at
it and consider it.
And the last one I'm going to cover is cost.
And basically the implementation of a national direction
is going to cost rate payers.
It's going to be paid for locally, especially
with the speed of transition.
So rate payers and taxpayers are all, all the same people.
And I think that we need a joined up approach
and no blame approach.
If, if we're going to implement a new national direction,
then there should be support from government.
It shouldn't just be all dumped onto re uh, local councils.
And if you look at page 21 of our submission,
we have actually done some work on the cost
of I implementation.
And with regards to regulatory, um, relief,
I'd just like to hand back to my colleague for some comments
around some local example
or a local example, uh,
which could end up costing an awful lot
in regulatory relief.
So the fear with regulatory relief is
that councils will be, uh, freeze will, will,
there'll be a chilling effect, a uh, reluctance
to protect things in the public interest, which is
what New Zealanders value.
And, uh, the public resources, I think
of it like these laws are the way in which we
as a country maturely balance the private property rights
of individuals businesses, and the public property rights
or public resource values
that we all benefit from if they are protected,
kept healthy, and so on.
So regulatory relief as proposed in the bills, will swing
that to make it extremely hard, if not impossible,
for councils to actually protect those public values,
which will in time have a political backlash, uh,
from the public who dislike seeing, uh, things being, um,
destroyed in front of their eyes.
So had a particular example, Richard, that you had in terms
of the WI two aqua for in the, uh, aquifer in the HU Valley.
Thank you, council Duffy.
So currently in our regional plan, we have a, uh,
protected area that covers most of the Hu Valley floor.
That's to protect the WI two aquifer, which is a source
of drinking water for much of the urban area.
So that currently is, uh,
has accompanying restrictions on use of land.
One of the concerns is if this regulatory relief framework
goes ahead, then it puts the council in position
of potentially having to provide regulatory relief if those
protections are to carry over into the new plans
for a large part of the region that's valued
for drinking water health, essentially.
Okay. So yes, that's a move away from the, the, uh,
the farmer lead regulatory relief
that we've heard quite a bit of to one that is, uh,
urban centric, but nevertheless, um, very important
and could end up costing rate payer
taxpayer, uh, a lot of money.
So they're the, they're the main points
that I wanted to cover.
Um, and councilor, I think if you're, so
we are, um, in conclusion as a final point, we, we'd like
to emphasize the critical importance
of a bipartisan approach.
And we do want to work together, as I said,
this is legacy legislation.
It's important for New Zealand.
It's critically important that we get it right.
And I, I do believe that between us, we can get it right.
We'd like to thank you for the opportunity to speak to you.
I know that you've had an awful lot of submissions
and not everybody is going
to get the opportunity to get to the table.
Uh, so we are grateful. Thank you.
And we are here to answer questions.
Thank you, uh, for that submission.
Uh, and for, you know, going through all the main points
that you wanted to raise today, uh,
look, we'll start with Rachel.
Thank you. And thank you for, uh, what you were saying about
MANA provisions as well.
And we've had in today, and Auckland Council
and Taranaki Regional Council all saying similar things.
So my question's not about that.
Um, it's about the, um, sequencing
of the spatial plans and the limits.
And we heard a lot of submitters earlier today talk about
how the limits need to come first
for the spatial plans to be able to work.
And I think that's what you advocate for as well.
But then we had Taranaki Regional Council saying, oh,
well maybe do a best effort spatial plan first
and then sort of try and backfill it.
Can you comment on that sequencing
and what you think is the most workable
and most efficient way of, of where the,
how the spatial plan works in the system?
We were discussing that just before we weren't we, Richard?
So over to you. Right? Timely.
Yeah. So in terms of the sequencing there,
greater Wellington have, um, suggested
that having the limits developed ahead
of the spatial plan is preferable.
That has them more then fixed in place.
You can then sort of work within those, uh,
environmental constraints,
those limits when planning you want infrastructure,
your growth, your development.
Um, so that is what we've asked for in our estimation.
That's what we'd be investing.
I would add that the, the first, um, uh,
the first compilation
of limits will not be perfect or comprehensive.
It will be based on evidence.
'cause they have to be based on scientific evidence, um,
and, you know, knowledge that we have.
But we have to get the, the rump of that in place
for the spatial plan to make sense
and actually be organized around what will, uh, meet,
uh, or be possible within limits and,
and ensure we don't get adverse outcomes.
We will also, limits will also be improved as they have,
as happens with plan changes under the
RMA and and improvements.
We've done a lot of work on our natural resources plan
and, uh, science based
and community lead processes to set fresh water, uh, targets
and attributes and limits and, and so on.
So there's a lot of work that that can actually be drawn
across, will obviously have to be tested again,
that it's still valid, but the, the, the body
of evidence is there to set those limits
before we create a spatial plan that simply doesn't talk
to them and you end up having to recreate the spatial plan
because it didn't talk to the limits.
Yeah. So that sequence won't be perfect,
but it needs to happen in that order.
Thank you. Thank you. And Ryan Hamilton has a question.
Thanks. Is Councilor Quentin, is it? Yeah. Yeah.
Thanks for your submission. I just wanted
to push back on your comments around regulatory takings.
You talked about it potentially having a
chilling effect on council.
Um, isn't that kind of the point,
because councils have taken a red pen over the last few
years and we just had, uh, you know,
volunteer heritage in here
before saying, you know,
different councils have ruled heritage by their definition,
they all these councils across the country
and it's had a a direct financial implication on, you know,
whether it's residential or commercial property.
So isn't it more gonna provide more of a balanced approach
before councils just takes a unilateral approach on
what their definition is?
So I can only speak to it within our perspective
and experience as a regional council and,
and the, the public values that we are seeking to protect
through plan rules
and so on, that would be affected by those provisions.
They are about the ecosystem health of our rivers.
They are about ensuring we don't take
too much from our water systems, uh, and,
and they die as a result.
And it affects the, they are the, the fundamental things
that the public of this region have told us.
Time and time again in consultations, in our long-term plans
and in the natural resources plan,
that these are the valued common natural resources
of the region that need to be protected.
So if we had to go back to square one
and have to justify every one of those
and provide compensation, um, it becomes
extremely difficult to protect the common property value
of the region, uh, because of that.
Now there's, there's nuance in there,
but that's, um, as a regional council,
we are fundamentally responsible
for those collective natural resources for the region,
which would become very hard to, to create rules
and even set limits around if, um, the threat
of compensation and, um, court cases around what is,
what meets the definitions in the act about being
significant impact and all those sorts of things.
It could take a long time for that to settle up.
Well, it could also provide balance
to something that's been outta balance.
I mean, in Wellington we have, for example, going back
to a heritage example, you had your Gordon Wilson Flats,
which was the regional potentially No,
but it's, it's the point of compliance
and overlay, um, you know,
that says this is in the common interest
and then it just freezes everything.
I mean, that has a chilling effect. One could argue,
Um, but could also result in no protection at all
for certain things like endangered wildlife in the region
that, uh, under the RMA becomes very difficult
to protect significant natural areas.
And, um, and some, these are some of the values,
the public values
that make Wellington such a great region to live in.
People love having kiwi wandering around our,
in our backyards through our family.
Yeah, I don't think, I don't think,
Say there'll be no protection.
That's not, that's not the intent of the bill.
It's just to provide more balance
around some of those restrictions. Mm-hmm.
Um, the effect, just a, just a quick question, um,
that I had in your submission at number 43.
Um, you talk about climate change,
notably absent from the goals, uh,
but then you don't really kind of give any solution
or talk further about it.
I just wondered what your, you, you were pointing to there,
um, and what you felt would be a solution.
Thank you, chip. Yes. Um,
so I think the primary solution is to simply have, uh,
the effects of climate change
or something to that effect in the list of goals.
Because we live in an economy
and a, uh, an environment that is changing
as the climate affects us.
We manage, uh, flood risk across most
of the big waterways of the Wellington region.
Mm-hmm. And so acutely aware of the increasing frequency
of flood events, uh, combined with sea level rise and so on.
So it's very important in planning decisions, especially
that these are part of the picture of consideration.
'cause what, uh,
what might have been sufficient 50 years ago
and might just be possible today won't actually be a good
solution in 50 years time.
That needs to be part of the conversation.
And, and you feel that the goals don't capture
that at this point, um,
and need some further reflection, essentially? That's
Right. Okay.
No, no, no. I was just interested in
that particular part. Did you,
That we've provided some, um, a alternative, um,
suggestions to the committee in our clause
table under clause 11.
Oh. How climate change can be
incorporated into the goals as well. So
Page 48, 48.
Oh yeah. I couldn't find it. Okay. No, good.
I'll have a look at that. Um, look, we'll go to Land Farm
who has her hand up.
Koto, thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up, I guess on the
severity of not only your submission today,
but others who, who are voicing similar things,
particularly the councils.
And you've touched on, you know, numerous aspects
of unworkable sequencing, uncertainty
around environmental limits, inadequate climate adaptation,
et cetera, et cetera.
And I'm just noting for one, you talk about,
for example, if the planning
and natural environment bills proceed as drafted,
there's a real risk that rivers estuaries
and harbors will face ongoing or increased pollution.
Now that is a very serious statement to make.
Is that why you have emphasized that
as the bills currently stand, you actually
as a council do not support them?
Like, is it that severe that if changes,
if serious changes are not made, um, we, we are virtually
entering this new world where we may not, for example,
have clear certain environmental protections?
I think that's a yes for that.
Certainly with, with the bill as it's drafted,
we are very concerned about the lack of limits.
And for things like sediment runoff, uh,
waste wastewater in particular, uh, we believe that actually
wastewater needs to be looked at so seriously
across the whole country
because it, if we don't have adequate limits for it, it's,
it's a serious environmental risk.
Quentin, would you like to add anything to that?
Yeah, I think firstly for me,
the primary imperative is to have a coherent system
that manages the things that's setting out to manage, uh,
in an enduring way.
So hence the cross party hence us being constructive in our
submission, trying to make this work from our sort
of implementing it role as a regional council, the desire
for there to be some multi partisan agreement here.
So this doesn't chop and change the, the thing
that costs our rate payers most is the sort of
of three year 10 of policies.
Mm-hmm. When just when we get one implemented,
it gets reversed and we
have to go and implement the next one.
So we want some certainty here. We want clarity.
Um, and, and yes, in paragraphs 37
and 38 of our submission, we point to an example of, uh,
the harbor, which has, um, been highly affected by, um,
um, pollution and land use change
over a very long period of time.
So we can't change the past.
Um, but it continues to, uh,
have increased sation from the land use around it.
And so the, the regional spatial plan the limits they need
to work together to actually restrain these things and,
and, uh, approve the health of a key like that,
uh, in an orderly way.
So that is our motivation. Yeah.
Look, we are gonna have to wrap it up there.
We have met time. We've actually gone over time.
Uh, lots to discuss.
Uh, but yeah, it's, yeah, lots, lots
of considerations in here.
So we appreciate your time today
and for being here in person.
So thank you. Thank you.
Thank you chair members. So now we will welcome
through our next submitter
Nui Trust, who are joining us via Zoom.
There we go. Welcome Graham. We can see you there.
Welcome to the Select committee this afternoon.
You have 20 minutes with us, so take your submission as read
and we'll hand it over to you for some opening statements.
Oh, well, thank you Madam Chair.
And, um, I'm not sure whether we feel privileged being
sandwiched in between so many councils this afternoon.
Oh, yes. Look, Nati thanks the committee
for the opportunity to discuss our submission on the natural
environment and planning bills.
Um, our submission today focuses on just a few areas from
our written submission.
We recognize the size and complexity of these bills
and the many varied submissions you
as a committee will be hearing, um, today
and over the next few days, I suspect so.
In respect of our opening statements, we note that success
of governments have made, have complained about
and attempted to replace the Resource Management Act.
While we've always welcomed reviews
that can improve environmental outcomes,
we're not convinced the RMA is fundamentally flawed.
Rather, we believe that a lack of clear guidance
and implementation systems have allowed local government
to continue poor planning practices through regional
and district planning documents.
Ironically, these plans often still represent previous
planning regimes of the past,
rather than embracing the innovation
and an effects based approach of 1991.
National direction setting has been slow, unresponsive,
and overly complex.
We've actually endorsed some
of the new provisions recently put forward to speed this up.
The freshwater direction is a shocking example of this.
Um, with so many layers of values
and freshwater units,
nobody can possibly articulate what it really means.
Nothing to do with the RMA legislation,
but rather with national policy direction setting.
And those that then in turn try to implement it further.
We are concerned about the lack of bipartisan agreement on
what is important for our environment
and the commitment to see it through.
Fundamentally, as you've already heard this afternoon,
we are seriously concerned about the government's policy
position to honor Toti Nati.
Rui is concerned that the advice
provided by the Expert Advisory Group
that was established in 2024 was not acted upon in
respect of Toti.
Missing is the recognition
and provisions for the relationship of Maori
and their culture and traditions
with their ancestral land water sites, wahi Tap
and other Tonga and protected customary rights.
Nati notes the regulatory impact statement
and we quote, treaty impact analysis has been constrained
by the pace in which this policy has been developed
and the li and the limited opportunity that has been
provided to provide to engage with Maori on the proposals.
We note that the previous government's RMA replacement bills
underwent extensive consultation, including Iwi and Hapu.
Mm-hmm. The bills were also backed by comprehensive evidence
to support the bill's development.
With the Randerson panel being informed
by many other reviews,
we are not convinced two separate bills will do anything
to assist establishing clear and a precise planning system.
We were equally critical
of the previous government on this point as well.
Rather, we suspect one bill will complicate the other
or one will become subservient to the other.
You are in fact creating complexity
before you've even started turning to some specific
as, uh, aspects of the bills.
Overall, the proposed bills have been developed
with limited interaction.
We've advocated for a partnership approach,
which would define best practice
for legislation of this nature.
This is completely missing here.
Access to the exposure draft was only provided a few days
before the bills were introduced to Parliament
for their first reading.
This approach to bills is totally unacceptable to nanu.
We should be working with the Crown to develop meaningful
and balanced environmental approach
for protection and development.
Goals within the bills are missing critical recognition
and provision for the relationship of Maori
and their culture and traditions, including kaki Tanga
with their ancestral lands, water sites, wahi, tapu,
and other Tonga protected and protected customary rights.
This has been replaced with a sub clause to provide
what is termed Maori interests.
Clause eight of both bills contain a treaty clause
that sets out how the crown's responsibility in relation
to the treaty are recognized.
Removing the substantive treaty clause is a major backward
step regarding the role of treaty.
It fails to recognize how resource management processes
and decision making fundamentally affect the rights
and interests of iwi and hapu.
Under Article two of the treaty, the matters
that are stated in Clause eight
to recognize the crown's responsibility under treaty
are not a substitute, um, are not a suitable substitute
for a substantive treaty clause.
These matters do not cover all the aspects
of treaty obligations
that can arise in the resource management system as general
and substantive treaty clauses do.
They're also inadequate, often treating consultation
with iwi as sufficient to discharge the rights
of treaty obligations.
That's just not the case.
Removing the substantive treaty clause would also generate
legal uncertainty.
There is an established body
of case law under section R eight of the RMA.
It would take years of litigation
to develop similar legal clarity about the relevance
and impact of treaty.
Under this new legislation, the Supreme Court has said
that non-substantive treaty clause like Clause eight should
not be in the interpreted as constraining the ability
of the decision maker to respect treaty principles.
In the absence of a very clear parliamentary intention,
the courts would likely apply this principle
to clause eight, meaning
that treaty principles would remain relevant outside
of specific context referred to in clause eight.
But there would be much uncertainty about
what this would mean in practice.
Nati Uni says, why create more confusion around this?
You may might as well just include, um,
a substantive treaty clause
and we recommend you include a substantive treaty clause
similar to form of section eight.
Under the RMA turning to clause nine
of both bills provides for the crown to negotiate
with iwi about how treaty settlement redress can
apply under these bills.
The crown only has an obligation
to engage in such negotiations for two years
unless it chooses otherwise.
It is unfair for iwi for the crown's obligation
to cease if it is unable
to complete agreement within two years.
This will be inconsistent with principles such
as good faith, partnership and active protection.
The two year period is also unrealistic.
Negotiating equivalent redress will not be a simple matter
of replacing references to provisions of the RMA.
We recommend deleting clause nine, subparagraph two
and three, which would remove the two year
deadline for negotiations.
Clause nine also contains no provision
for dispute resolution between the crown and iwi.
If it was unable to reach agreement,
we would recommend you adding provisions
regarding dispute resolution to clause nine.
So I think there was a question asked earlier,
but we'll provide an example statutory
acknowledgements in our respect.
Statutory acknowledgements are set out in our, um,
settlement legislation
and they identify cultural, historical,
spiritual traditional association of Nati Rui within
AWA in important.
These statutory acknowledgements were rega were negotiated
in the context of part two of the RMA, specifically
with the broad requirements in that act to recognize
and provide for the relationship of Maori and their culture
and traditions with their ancestral lands water sites, wahi,
tapu, and Tonga under section six
and have particular regard to Tonga Section seven
and take into account the principles
of the treaty in a wider context.
Consent authorities must have regard
to statutory acknowledgement areas in determining affected
person status in relation
to an application for resource consent.
We acknowledge the clause within the bills
that require territorial authorities to ensure
that they fully, that the,
that they fulfill obligations relating
to statutory acknowledgement which apply
within their districts.
However, in the absence of these overarching arrangements
as set out under the RMA, the role
and functions of statutory acknowledgements in the bills are
fundamentally different.
Nati UNA is serious concerned
that our statutory acknowledgements will no longer be
protected in the manner as required by the current RMA and
therefore we wouldn't have negotiated them in that manner
because we did so
because we had the RMAs wider substantive clauses.
And we consider, therefore this is a significant breach
of our settlement.
Turning to clause 11 of the bills,
which contains Maori interest goals,
these clauses view Maori interest as being limited
to sites of significance.
That's just not the case.
Maori land and participation in planning processes,
they ignore the holistic relationship.
And again, this, I think this goes back
to the question that was asked before.
They ignore the holistic relationship that Iwi
and Hapu have with the fwa why
and environment within their taa.
The wording of the Maori interest goal does not come,
does not cover some important matters
that are include in section six and seven of the RMA is.
It therefore fails to recognize the holistic relationship
of iwi and Hapu with the environment within their Taki wa.
We therefore recommend that the wording recommended
by the expert advisory group is used in the
Maori interest goal.
And we won't repeat it here. It's in our submission.
Turning briefly to regulatory relief,
and I know you've had a lot of, uh,
submissions on regulatory relief.
Um, the regulatory relief provisions
of the planning bill are opposed by Nazi rury
as they may have significant threat
to environmental wellbeing.
Even though I do have some sympathy with the, uh,
the submitter previously in the houses
that may be trying to be protected.
The bills say that council must seek
to achieve certain goals.
For example, the identification
and protection of sites of significant to Maori.
Yet in seeking to achieve that outcome,
the same council would have to provide regulatory relief for
what the bill bills require of them requiring the regulator
to pro to pay for planning rules focused on identifying
and protecting public goods could deter the recognition
of those important environmental and cultural matters.
Further, the inclusion of sites
of significant in Maori in specified top in the specified
list of topics could place both local government
and iwi in a difficult position.
Whereby the protect while while whereby the
the protection iwi may seek,
could cause significant financial impact
on local authorities.
We recommend as a minimum sites of significant
to Maori be removed from the regulatory relief provisions.
Turning quickly now to transition,
transition into a new single legislative framework has
always been complex and often becomes confusing.
We believe the proposed proposed transition timeframes in
the bill are extremely optimistic
and are based on the reduction of engagement
and notification requirements.
Transition timeframes do not take the potential
for legal action into account.
The sequencing and haste
of the proposed transition has the potential
for regional spatial plans to be required
to be updated within a year of being decided upon
delayed release of data collection
and analysis requirements such as methodologies
for setting management units.
Health limits or evidence for spatial plans could lead
to the perverse consequences of such poor quality plans,
which could result in worst outcomes
for communities and the environment.
It could almost mean that the system is being set up to fail
before it even starts.
So we would recommend that you have a minimum
of a three year transition period.
So in conclusion, NA opposes the bill in their current form.
The lack of a valid treaty clause is unacceptable
and a breach to the treaty in itself.
The bill also fails to address key issues
of any long-term sustain sustainable resource management
system, the wellbeing of future generations
and the impacts of risk such
as the things I think mentioned previously.
Climate change. The bills goals,
including Maori interest goals,
have been developed in the absence of consultation
with the public iwi and hapu.
Some goals are inconsistent with the recommendations
by the expert advisory group.
If the committee does recommend to proceed,
we trust you will consider the recommendations we have
suggested to give this new regime at least a chance
to go ahead correctly
and of being perhaps just a little bit more than just
political expediency for the here and now.
Nati Rooney, thanks you for making the time for us
to make this submission for you.
Look, thank you for that submission.
Graham, look, we're gonna move to HOA
who had her hand up first.
So, HOA,
Um, thank you for that comprehensive submission both in
writing and, um, orally today.
Um, knowing that you gave a Fullsome submission, I wanted
to really hone in maybe
'cause we do have limited time on man agreements, uh, seeing
that there's now the narrow focus of the window available
for Maori to engage with, man, we've heard earlier today
around the success of
how the relationships have been developed through man.
Um, do you think that, uh, we should not close the window
for Maori to continue on with that man agreement?
And, um, thank you also for speaking
to statutory acknowledgements
and the limiting, uh, that the, the limitations
that will be placed upon them in the future.
One other thing that I wanted
to in invite your consideration is also around Maca.
We heard from the seafood industry earlier, uh,
their concerns around our CMT, uh, rights
and plans that might impact the resource management space.
So just a, a few partai generally,
but, um, thank you once again.
Um, manhan agreements, um, have not been something
that in here in Taranaki
that had actually been pursued greatly.
Um, ironically we are pursuing one right now at the moment.
So, um, look, I think anything that enables greater, um,
participation and cementing in a partnership arrangements
with the councils is important and Nati supports that.
Um, we think there's an opportunity here
to develop something that goes beyond just recording
what we do, um,
but something that actually enshrines partnerships.
So we would certainly be endorsing that
and we would never endorse anything that closes a window
for us to participate
and continue to participate in good faith.
I might add, we don't do this just out
of frustrating the system.
We do that to try and improve the system.
Um, in terms of, um, generally, um, things in terms of,
um, we do have an application for our macca claim, um,
in front of the court.
We actually do believe, and you will see in our submission,
and I deliberately didn't put it in, um, my oral part
because there is, um, it's quite a complex area,
but there are sections in there
where we talk about the legislation is quite contradictory,
where in one respect it tries to look like it's protecting,
and on the other hand, it effectively opens up the whole
thing, um,
which severely could undermine our position going forward.
And we think the committee should certainly
have close look at that.
Um, in terms of what's going on there, as we think, again,
there's some, I think what if suffers from this bill is,
is a great deal of rush and confusion.
And I think by fault you see sections
tripping over themselves.
And so I I I worry about your poor officials trying to sift
through some of that because it will cause you problems
later on if you don't get that sorted now.
Thank you. What, we'll move to Rachel for a question.
Uh, thank you. Going to the set acknowledgements
that you discussed and how they're based on the part two
of the RMA six, E seven A, uh,
and eight, can you see a way
for the resource Management act to be replaced whereby your,
um, statutory acknowledgements
and settlement would not be undermined?
Oh, look, look, most definitely we are, we're not opposed
to review and we're not opposed
to effectively the RMA being replaced.
What we're saying is pick up the
best bits and bring them over.
Um, the total lack of 7, 6, 7,
and eight in the new proposed bills is worrying some
because if you are then going to ask us within two years
to renegotiate how we bring our settlement in, um,
it causes a real problem.
'cause our settlement was based in on the Resource
Management Act of 1991.
So we wouldn't have settled in the manner
that we did not knowing that we had legislative backstop
of having that wider holistic view of six, seven,
and eight under the RMA.
If we didn't, don't have that,
those statutory acknowledgements quite likely will need
to be way more explicit in how they recognize our rights
and interests because we can't rely on the council's having
to implement six, seven,
and eight when, uh, resource consent comes along and
or when council's considering policy considerations such
as a new district or regional plan and
therefore how it all interacts.
So it's like, it's like
what you're trying to propose with us.
This is a funnel effect.
So the funnel effect of our statutory acknowledgement is in
fact supported by the top end of the RMA,
which gives us six, seven, and eight.
So in fact, you're doing the reverse to us.
Um, you're taking the funnel effect that you're trying
to put in place by creating a national standard,
but you're taking away six, seven,
and eight, which was effectively the national standard
by default under the RMA for us. Not,
Not, not me to be clear. No, not
You. I'm talking
globally. Yeah,
That's good. Just,
just as supplementary on this
because you, um, spoke about just removing clause nine.
Um, but then I, did I catch that wrong
or no, would you say kind of just
revising clause nine clause
'cause clause, clause, clause nine obviously seeks
to enter agreements to uphold treaty settlements,
redress or arrangements.
I mean that's, yeah, that's a good thing, right?
Yes. No, and we are not, we're not saying
that we are welcome clause nine.
I'm just saying that clause nine,
because of what I just talked about,
will potentially will take a lot longer than two years.
And we're saying that it cannot be, um, uh, removed, um,
from, uh, it, you just can't stop negotiating with iwi
after two years if you so decide
and that there shouldn't be a limit to that.
Um, and that there should be, um,
dispute resolution clauses in there as well.
So you are, so you, uh, happy with clause nine,
but you just, uh, are kind of saying it needs to be revised
and looking at that two year timeframe?
Yes, most definitely. It needs to be,
because we believe on the example that we've given
that there will have to be extensive renegotiation of some
of these clauses and how they manifest themselves, um, both
through our own legislation
and through this new legislation.
Okay. No, that clarifies it. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that. Look, we've met time.
Thank you for your time today.
Uh, really interesting submission
and some valuable points that you've made.
So thank you. Thank you,
Thank you.
Right. Moving on to our next submitter,
uh, is Dr.
Kawan Jones, who is gonna be joining us online.
Oh, there we go. Welcome
to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand over to you
and, uh, be mindful
that members will have questions as well.
So over to you.
So my name's Kawan. Uh, I'm, I'm an academic, I work at
ua, um, and I'm also an honorary adjunct professor at, uh,
te Waka Victoria, university of Wellington.
Uh, but I make this submission in my personal capacity.
Uh, my research focuses primarily on issues relating to
tei Maori rights, indigenous people's rights.
And so those are the areas in which I've focused
my submission.
Um, I'm opposed to, uh, the planning bill
and the natural environment bill, um, on the basis that
they inappropriately limit the rights that are protected by
tei, um, and they fail more broadly
to adequately provide for Maori rights.
Uh, I did want to note that there are many other aspects
of the bills, which I'm opposed to.
Um, uh, for example,
I don't think the bills provide sufficient environmental
protections, but I know that there are others who are
probably better place to address those concerns.
Um, and I see through the submissions that, um,
they have done, so I'll leave that to them.
Um, but I do think that the fundamental conceptual premise
of these bills is, um, so flawed
that I would urge this elite committee to reject them.
Um, the, the coalition government,
I think has made it really clear that it is actively opposed
to Maori rights and to tgi
and the provisions in relation to, uh,
Maori interests in these bills are, uh,
further evidence of that.
These provisions significantly water down
the protections that are currently
provided by the Resource Management Act,
and they inappropriately attempt to limit TE rights
to a narrow set of procedural mechanisms.
And I heard the, um, last, uh, submitter
also raise these similar concerns.
Um, because by moving away from the
substantive protections
or the considerations
that are in the Resource Management Act
and trying to limit Maori interest to this narrow set
of procedural requirements, uh, it really does
diminish the protection that is available, uh,
for Maori rights.
And I think misunderstands actually the, uh,
the rights that are protected by TE ori.
So, you know, it's moving from those substantive matters
where there's a requirement to all those things in part to,
uh, but in particular in relating
to Maori interest is the requirement to recognize
and provide for the relationship of Maori, uh,
and their culture and traditions with their ancestral lands,
water sites, wahi, tapua,
and other tga, the requirement to have particular regard to
TGA and the substantive requirement
to take into account the principles
of the Treaty of Waitangi.
What happens when you replace those with a narrow set
of procedural mechanisms is
that you do lose the ability to, uh,
actually protect what is protected
by identity to your white tangi.
And you do also, uh,
uh, do also fail to protect, uh,
what is set out in treaty settlements.
And again, I note the last submitter also
addressed that point.
I just want to want you to, what the
Ang Tribunal said when it was considering,
uh, actually focused of course on,
on the Resource Management Act in the context
of the Y 2 62 inquiry.
And the tribunal found that
a treaty compliance environmental management regime
is one that capable of delivering, uh,
the following outcomes by means of a process
that balances the kaki interest alongside
other legitimate interests.
And so the outcomes that the tribunal identified were first
of all, uh, controlled by Maori
of environmental management in respect of tga,
where it is found that the kaki interest should
be accorded priority.
Secondly, it should deliver partnership models
for environmental management in respect of tga,
where it is found that kaki should have a say in decision
making, but other voices should also be heard.
And thirdly, that should deliver effective influence
and appropriate priority to kaki interest in all areas
of environmental management when the
decisions are made by others.
And I just want to note there that the tribunal setting out
that the, the kind of default position ought to be
that Maori interests are protected in a way that allows
Maori to be making decisions about, uh,
environmental management.
It recognizes that there'll be instances,
perhaps many instances where there are other voices
that ought to be heard in that process.
And that in those instances, a partnership model
is, uh, appropriate.
And the tribunal's clear
that when it talks about a partnership model,
it's not talking about consultation
or, uh, an advisory group,
it's talking about participation in decision making
and then in all instances that it should deliver
effective influence, uh,
and appropriate priority to kayak interest.
So that is what the tribunal talks about, is
what a treaty compliant environmental regime would deliver.
And these bills are not capable
of delivering those outcomes,
and they take us further away from that, uh,
than even the Resource Management Act.
Now, just a couple of other points I wanted
to touch on briefly is one, just to note that actually part
of the direction that the tribunal was suggesting we ought
to move, and, uh, part of the, the response to
that was the establishment of agreements
and things are of course, um, no longer going
to be an available option,
but even the existing ones are going to be weakened
and constrained by the new structure o of, of the act
and the opport, the reduction of opportunities for
participation or for the influence
and the decision making processes.
Um, and there are also, uh,
also weakened and constrained, uh, other kinds
of partnership instruments that have been available such
as the joint management agreements
and ability to transfer powers to iwi.
Perhaps just the last point that I'll make is that, uh,
the bills also appear to proceed on the assumption
that treaty settlements circumscribed rights under Teti
treaty settlements do not grant or define rights under teti.
All they do is provide limited redress
for historical breaches.
And in any case, the bills are going to unsettle
existing treaty settlements, uh,
despite the assurances to the contrary.
Uh, and again, this was pointed out by the last submitter
as well, that, um,
all the existing settlements have been agreed in the context
of the broad framework for participation
that's set out in the Resource Management Act.
And if that structure of participation changes,
that is actually diminishing the redress
that is provided in settlements.
Uh, and I think that means that, um, the government ought
to be prepared to look at
renegotiating not just those particular provisions,
but entire treaty settlements.
And I think that would be a mistake to go down that path.
Koto,
Thank you for your submission.
Look, we've got time for one quick question
from Rachel Brooking.
Uh, quick question. Um, Cohen, I follow you
and know that you know a lot about, um,
you follow Treaty Maori environmental public law issues.
And so I'm wondering if you were surprised that
National introduced a bill that, um, was
so drastic in terms of being regressive in terms
of Maori participation
and that getting rid of six e seven a eight
and, um, the arrangements you were just talking about?
Yeah, well, certainly ordinarily I would've been surprised
that a government would move to take away, um,
and move backwards on protections for Maori interest
and certainly move to take away protections that are going
to undermine existing settlements.
Um, but, uh, with the, the previous sections
of seeing this government taking, um, I'm not surprised
that, that they are not interested in Maori rights, te
evidence, good public policy.
Thank you. Look, thank you.
We obviously have to disagree with you there.
Um, but we thank you for your submission. Um, today.
We have met time, so we will have to leave it there.
But thank you Gilda. Right.
Moving on to the next submission.
Uh, we have Ben Ross joining us,
and Ben, we can see you there.
Welcome to this select committee this afternoon.
Oh, no, you disappeared.
He popped up and then disappeared again.
A few technical issues.
Oh, there, we we go. We can see you again, Ben.
Welcome to the Select committee.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Thank you for that chair.
And to the committee in general, I support
where I'm focusing most mission just focused on the planning
bill in general.
I left the natural, um, environment Bill to, um, more
of my ESTEEM colleagues in Auckland in the
Ika to reference on.
But mainly where I'm going with the planning bill,
where it needs to be amended is,
and I'll read out in my submission
what was in clauses for the purpose.
And we know that the proposed act is
to establish the framework around planning,
regulated development and the enjoyment of land.
That, and this is what I've added to compliments,
but must not inhabit what is known as the public, uh,
public welfare supreme practice.
This is taken straight out of
what is called the Japanese Land Use Law Act 1974,
which also codifies, uh, the standardized zones,
which Minister Bishop has said more than once in public he
wishes to emulate.
So my submission basically is fusing the two systems
together because without the public domain,
your private domain,
that's your private property rights
just simply doesn't exist.
And that is because through this paradigm shift
with public welfare supreme, to kick it off,
you don't have a collective utility
that takes legal preference over individual preference.
So basically that is reinforcing section 14
of the proposed bill,
but it is also looking at how our cities
and our rural areas evolve through time.
It looks at bringing in natural resource preservation,
so hard ecological limits to protect our soils,
which the N-P-S-H-P-L does a good job it needs strengthening
on, but it also protects our primary industry.
And that comes through the conflict between our rural sector
and the urban sector.
When we have greenfield, uh,
developments happening in our cities,
we also look at a healthy cultural
and living, basically it's a mandated towards wellbeing, uh,
through the access of light air and nature.
So whenever you hear medium
and high density developments take off, this is often one
of the big pushbacks.
What I'm looking at is to codify this in the public domain
so that while a private property rights are there,
it can't infringe on the public domain
where their access is lost.
And the most big one is balanced development.
Basically, Japan follows what's called an infrastructure
first or infrastructure led development.
That is all your infrastructure goes in.
That's all seven types. Top to bottom goes in first
before you can even rezone and before the private sector
or the public sector, it's public housing can even develop.
And from there I'm also, look, I'm pushing for a return
to some of you might remember the old
Metropolitan Urban Limits.
They were controversial, but they had a point in stopping
that uncontrolled infrastructure deficits at sprawl
consuming our rural lands, such as in ko,
which is in constant conflict.
At the same time we're looking at,
or I was looking at density flows, frequency,
and this is cropped up in Auckland just recently
with Plan Change one 20 basically
where you have public transport available,
the density should be matching, for example,
if it's rapid transit.
So that's, uh, great separated access like the northern
busway or our railway lines should be minimum of six stories
to utilize the full capacity
of the transit system if it's a frequent bus route.
So every 10 minutes, it should be at minimum every three
stories and that leaves the rest of your suburban area
to manage along between one
and three stories as the demand sees.
But that said, the bill does propose,
um, aspects around reverse sensitivity,
but I've gone even further.
Basically, if you are the agent of change, so if you wish
to build a development next to a port, a railway station
or next to a farm, the age of change must bear 100%
of the cost of development.
So the reverse sensitivity can't kick off.
This is gonna be codified in our legislation
to stop these reverse sensitivity claims,
backing up the planners and council
and backing up the environment core,
constantly causing delays, frustration and time.
If this NewCom newcomers principle is adamantly clear,
that agent, agent of change knows what is expected of them
before engaging in it.
And then finally we've got rural stewardship.
And also what I would like to see codified
for our cities anyway is the 3 3300 rule.
And this is because especially
after the recent storms we've just had over the last five
years, we must see three trees from every building.
Bourbon canopy must be at 30%, uh, forest canopy
and 300 meters from a park.
This goes into the Sponge City model.
Finally, I did have one concern when
this came out for submissions.
The standardized zones didn't come out with them.
They're not due out to the end of the year per the ministry.
This is a problem. That is
because they should be coming
up together to go through this process.
'cause one is likely to find a fault in the other,
and if so, we can fix it.
By the time this legislation goes live at the end
of the year, we can't correct it if the zones find the
fault or vice versa.
So that is where we are with the, uh, my bill, uh, sorry,
submission to the planning bill.
I'll leave it to questions to the commission.
Thank you Ben, for your submission.
Uh, look, we'll go first to Rachel Brooking.
Yeah, thank thanks Ben for such a full fulsome submission
and all your beautiful, um, diagrams as well.
Uh, I've got two questions.
Um, so one is on this, um, 3 30, 300. Yeah.
So you, you mentioned clause 11
and that well-functioning urban and rural areas.
Yes. Uh, is that where you see the hook
for codification would be,
and do you also think
that it should be somewhere about the standardized zones?
That's one question. And then the second one is,
were you just telling us about Japan that um,
the infrastructure has to be in the ground as it were
before you can rezone?
Correct. Okay, thanks.
If you just expand slightly on both of those points.
Certainly. So the 3 3300 rule, um, does,
so if you're on page 1, 5, 2 of my submission,
it does sit in clause 11, the goals and part one,
but it also sits comprehensively in schedule two, um,
under part xx the, uh, three governing protocols.
And so that basically codifies it in
and thus your regional spatial plans
and your land use plans would have to adhere to it
to make sure it was carried out in parts four
and five of the bill, which is consenting and enforcement.
Okay. As for Japan's method, that is correct.
They go infrastructure first,
and once that is all in place knowing
that there is the seven classes of infrastructure,
then the rezoning occurs.
And then development can happen in New Zealand
and Australia in the west,
we particularly do it the other way around, which is
how you get, um, issues such
as public transport not in place for up to 30 to 40 years.
And also how your physical infrastructure,
which is your three waters, is also you find
that it runs outta capacity extremely quickly
and you've got these very large upgrades, which can cost,
uh, a small fortune to a council no matter what size it is.
Thank you. Thank you.
Look, we've got time for one last question from LA
who has her hand up.
Ben, thank you so much and yeah,
really appreciate the illustrations.
That was super cool.
Um, yeah, if, am I correct, like, you know, you,
you outline a lot in your submission mm-hmm.
But would I be correct in kind of summarizing it,
that basically the government are attempting to do,
say like the Japanese model,
except we've essentially totally dropped the ball
in the environment part of that, and therefore
We've the, we've Doesn't fit together.
Do you wanna reword what I'm saying?
Yeah, so basically if the minister is true to his word
that we are to emulate the system,
there's basically three parts.
You've got the private property side,
okay, we've got in there.
You've got the public domain side, which is absent,
and then you've got the standardized zones,
which we don't see until December.
Um, that third part is problematic
for reasons I've just mentioned earlier,
because if a fault shows up in that
because of the legislation, we can't correct it as easy.
So yeah, so we've got part one set,
we just don't have part two, which is the public domain
and the standardized zones, um, available twice,
which could cause problems when this
all comes about in December.
Brilliant. Thank you very much, Ben.
Um, and I echo my fellow colleagues
and the very thorough, uh, submission 172 pages
that you've popped through with some, um,
lovely illustrations there as well.
So we appreciate your time and your feedback.
So much thought. Thank you, Jeff. Yes. A lot of thought.
Yeah. So thank you very much.
It's really valuable. Thank you.
Thank you, committee. Right, right.
Moving on to our next submitter, uh, is Kat
McMillan and Kat, we can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon,
Milla.
Um, I'm a counselor at the Bay of P Plenty regional Council.
Um, but this is,
and this is my personal submission,
I understand they also have a submission.
Um, so thank you so much for the opportunity to speak today.
And really the reason I wanted to, uh, come to the hearing,
uh, personally, is I am genuinely concerned, um,
that these bills as they stand currently drafted, will,
um, cause further harm to our natural environment.
Um, I see that as a risk as they are currently
and potentially, um, this could be
regression dressed up as progress.
Um, for me, I sort of think, you know, one
or two years could pass
and things could kind of look okay, you know, there's some,
been some red tape cuts, some green tape cut, cut,
everything seems a bit, um, more simple,
but then three, four years down the road, uh,
it could potentially be too late when if
damage is already done.
So I think it's, it, it's so important
that we get these right.
Um, so I'll just sort of go through a little bit
and pull out a little bit, um, about my concerns.
So as we know,
New Zealand is now regularly in climate crisis
and this will become more frequent and severe.
Um, my community experiences experiences this as you know,
a couple of weeks ago with Mo Nui and Welcome Bay.
Um, our biodiversity is under strain,
and yet these bills elevate private property rights
above environmental protection.
They weaken treaty commitments below the standard set
by the current RMA
and introduce a compensation regime
that could possibly effectively force councils into
inaction on biodiversity.
Being more permissive is not the same
as being more efficient.
I do support meaningful RMA reform built on environmental
protection, genuine efficiency, and real treaty partnership.
What I can't support is reform
that outsources environmental risk to future generations.
And that's my concern that things are OAA okay now.
And, um, the next generation will have to pay the price and,
and I don't wanna see that happen.
So the first thing is that climate change must be
at the heart of reform.
These bills will influence a whole load of activities
with direct climate consequences.
Yet climate impacts have been excluded from
the decision making framework.
Um, there's no integration with our 2050 emissions targets
or emissions reduction plans.
Nature-based solutions must be enabled by this legislation,
not sidelined adaptation to sea level rise.
And extreme weather events must be
provided for climate resilient urban areas will not emerge
from a framework that removes consideration of urban trees,
green spaces, and good urban design.
Um, Ben previously spoke to that about the sponge city
and the 30% canopy cover.
Uh, to totally total caught what he's saying there.
The bill should be amended to place climate mitigation
and adaptation at the center of planning
and decision making.
Biodiversity needs active protection.
So the bill's goal of no net loss
of biodiversity is a starting point,
but ellos nature doesn't need to be held steady.
We all know it needs to be restored.
I strongly support including a maintain
and improve goal in the natural environment.
Bill no net loss is too easily exploited as cover
for potentially destroying rich healthy ecosystems in
exchange for lesser value areas.
Um, and that's not like for, like,
the bills are also undermined
by their own structure ecosystem.
Health limits are set
after the spatial plans, meaning development can be approved
before we know whether the environment can
or can't sustain it.
Then there's a regulatory takings
that I know you've had a lot of, uh, uh,
submissions on councils, uh,
are already under enormous financial pressure
and the government proposes to cap rates further.
Um, compensation liability will likely have a chilling
effect discouraging councils from protecting the areas
that most need it.
Indigenous biodiversity, significant natural areas
and outstanding landscapes are a public good
for all people of Arturo.
Protecting them shouldn't come
with a financial penalty, incentivize.
Non non-regulatory protection mechanisms do already exist
and are working really
well anda these bills.
And we heard, just was listening to the speaker before Ben.
Uh, these bills represent a weaker commitment
to Titi than the RMA already provides.
Reducing iwi and hapu
to a consultation role is not partnership.
Legal requirements around the relationship of Maori
with their ancestral lands have been crucial in protecting
significant environmental values.
Removing that foundation is a step backwards.
What's good for Maori is good for all of us.
Public participation must be protected.
National policies and standards should be developed
by an independent board of inquiry, not ministers.
Timeframes for the first plans are too compressed
for genuine engagement.
The threshold for public notification is too high
and must be lowered so
that wherever effects are more than minor communities
and nature do have a voice.
Landscapes, green spaces
and urban, urban livability,
the bills present prevent decision makers from
considering landscape effects.
Unless a landscape is outstanding,
this in my mind is too narrow.
New Zealand's landscapes are essential to our identity,
our tourism, and our sense of place in our cities.
The bills would remove almost all consideration
of urban trees and green spaces.
A more permissive system that produces worse places
to live is not progress.
Livable climate resilience cities require nature-based
solutions and this framework moves us a away from that goal.
What I do support, I'm not here simply to oppose.
I do support consolidating the number of plans
and simplification done well without stripping community
agreed protections or make resource management
clearer and more effective.
I support strong national environmental limits
carrying real legal consequences
with robust monitoring enforcement remaining
with regional councils.
Those who pollute
or breach environmental bottom lines must face
meaningful consequences.
I support protecting outstanding landscapes
and indigenous biodiversity as a public good
for all New Zealanders.
I also have concerns about the amount of reform
that's going on at the moment
because we've got simplifying local government,
the rates cap proposal, um,
the whole RMA reform emergency management,
and then the mega ministry amalgamation.
Um, you could potentially have
regional councils being amalgamated with, uh, TLAs.
You could have the me at the same time
that the mega ministry is an amalgamation.
Um, the rates caps, you know, stopping, uh,
potential good things from happening,
climate change coming at us a hundred miles an hour.
Um, we are directly impacted this.
We've seen deaths in our community, um, just weeks ago.
Uh, this is live and raw and real for the people of roa.
Um, and so we've gotta get this right.
So Reform done well does have my full support reform
that trades environmental integrity
for speed weakens treaty obligations
and hands the costs of environmental protection
to already stretch communities does not.
I urge this committee
to ensure the final legislation places the health
of our natural environment, genuine treaty partnership
and climate resilience at its core
as its foundational purpose.
Na mihi open to any questions if I've got time?
Uh, yeah, just we've got one quick question from la
Thank You
Ka, thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up on you,
you mentioned in your opening comments about, you know,
what you can't support is reform
that puts essentially environmental risk
on future generations.
Yeah. And it was sort of raised earlier by a number
of submitters that that element of, you know,
the RMA somewhat has some consideration
of future generations in terms of considering their needs.
Do you think there is scope for a case
that we would explicitly refer to future generations
in the goals of particularly the natural environment bill,
but it could be the the planning bill as well?
Absolutely. I mean, we, if you look around the world,
you know, you look at the Wales example
with the commissioner for future generations
and putting that lens on it.
And, and to me it's just, if you're making policy
or good governance decision making,
you are looking a long way down the road at the impacts
and a future generations lens.
Whether you call it future generations lens
or you know, tomorrow's people, whatever you call it,
unless you put that lens on policy,
then you are just serving the now
and the can is gonna get kicked down the road.
And with environmental protection
and restoration, you can't wind back the clock.
You know, if you're, if you're destroying natural habitat,
um, that's existed for a long time
and you're not restoring it, then it can become too late.
As biodiversity is beginning to collapse
and we're seeing this, we are seeing species wiped out
and eradicated, that's too late then, you know?
So, uh, absolutely I support that,
whatever framing it's called,
I'm not fussed about the wordsmithing of it,
but it needs to address the long-term thinking
before it's too late.
And that's, you know, within, uh, restoring nature
as well as protecting it.
Look, thank you very much, Kat.
We will have to leave it there.
We have met time, but, uh,
we appreciate your submission this afternoon. Thanks
So much Kaki tea.
Thank you. Uh, so moving
to our next submitter now is Judy Lawrence
who is joining us in person.
Welcome to the Select committee this afternoon.
Judy, lovely to have you with us.
You have 10 minutes, so we'll hand it over to you.
And thank you very much. Um, this, this submission is,
is not just from me.
Um, it's from Dr. Rob Bell and Dr. Ben Tombs.
And collectively we have many decades
of experience in natural hazards management, um,
coastal management and planning and the law.
So we brought this together, um,
to focus on one really particular part, um,
of the legislation relating to, uh, natural hazards
and climate change.
We are in a new normal,
and that new normal, as you've heard already today,
will continue to change.
And that aspect is critical to how
we manage our natural resources.
So it's not something that is static, it's something
that's a moving target.
And so we need appropriate tools to do that.
And a lot of that has been developed already in the research
environment in New Zealand, funded from science funding,
which we no longer have.
And so we have an urgent need for legislative alignment
across siloed activities of land use, planning,
emergency management, national hazards, MA management,
risk reduction, and climate adaptation.
Last week we made submissions
to the emergency management bill,
which has no reference at all to climate change,
and it has no reference at all to climate adaptation.
Um, and we asked that that be included so
that the linkages can be made between that
and the planning bill
and the natural, um, environment bill as well.
This is urgent because we are increasing frequency
and intensity of river, um, flooding,
storm and coastal flooding.
And these damage costs are escalating
and will continue to escalate.
And our insurance backstop, if you like, um,
is transferring that risk to
an industry which is showing signs of wanting to withdraw.
And those costs will fall on homeowners. To date.
The statutory set settings have been ineffective in
reducing climate risk.
And we've documented,
and others have documented in many places that houses are,
are still being built in flood areas.
And this is a problem
because flood damage does not wait, wait
for things like maps and spatial plans.
And so we have a, a, a real problem here that
we are changing a regime
and in the meantime, what are the backstops
as transitional measures
that can halt building in really dumb places?
And how can, how can we also break the cycle of reactive,
um, re reaction as opposed to anticipation
and PR from also our faith in protection
where protection has limits
and the siloed practices between emergency management,
land use planning, um, climate change are now we have a,
a national adaptation framework,
which was released last year, uh,
with recommendations in there that, um, were to, um,
add to the recovery component of C dm, um,
actions giving effect to adaptation plans.
But the mandate for the adaptations plans is not yet in law.
So we have a sequencing issue between statutes
and we have a need
to really link up these statutes, um, significantly.
Now, while the planning bill has already got some, um,
protections in there, it doesn't really go far enough.
And I think we've heard today about the possibility
of adding climate change to the purpose statement.
Um, and the key nature of,
of spatial plans
and identifying areas that are at risk, et cetera.
There needs to be a stronger link
between the national direction
and, um, the coastal policy statement, the natural hazards,
um, natural policy statement
and, um, the natural adaptation framework.
Um, one of the problems
with section 46 we highlighted in our submission, um,
which is about identifying significant risks
from natural hazards.
Now, this is only gonna work if land use consents are
triggered, but we've got a more permissive system now,
and in a lot more cases,
land's consents will not be triggered.
And so there needs to be, it's a very high bar
and it needs to be clear that natural hazards
and worsening of climate change actually are fundamental
and are not affected by that.
Um, by land use.
The requirement on land use consents that, um,
may not be triggered.
Also, the definition of safeguards
to community needs needs further, um, elaboration.
Um, what does that mean?
It it, if, if we follow the, the way we've been going,
we'd be, we will protect, we'll put up levies, sea walls,
they will fail at the coast eventually,
and they're beginning to fail.
Now in certain places they're extremely expensive as well.
And schedule seven
of the Planning Act emphasizes protect options again.
And so there needs to be more nuance in, in the, in the act
at to identify triggers for anticipatory planning.
And because these will be required
to enable a dynamic options to be assessed rather than just
reacting and putting out protection.
Um, and,
and also in the, in the building act, there is,
there could be provisions, um, recommended
by this committee, um, which is similar to clause 84 C four
of the, um, and also with the Climate Change Response Act.
So those are the more detailed, um, comments.
But one, one thing I'll just finished with is
that we've had a tradition in New Zealand of
first default is to mitigate the risk.
And very often this will allow developments,
which we know long term cannot be mitigated.
And so this is why we are,
we are anticipating wanting anticipatory planning
with clear provision in schedules
or wherever for protect, for um, triggers
for anticipatory planning.
So thank you, the opportunity to comment.
Yeah, no, thank you Judy.
That's really interesting
and some interesting points that you have made there.
Um, Rachel's got a question for you?
Yes, thank you Judy, and thanks
for all the work you've done over a long time on this issue.
Mm-hmm. Um, I I have two questions.
One's a little question,
and that is, when you're talking about this anticipatory
planning and, um, the emphasis on schedule seven
of protection, uh, do you,
did you have any drafting changes?
That's one question or, or can you provide some,
and then the other question is about the silos
with the other legislation
and I I appreciate that you've just submitted on the
emergency, um, legislation.
Are there any, again, specific links
that you think are needed through this planning act
and have you thought about, um, how to do that?
Yeah, I think, I think there's some in our submission that
that has been suggested, the changes to section, um,
section 80, um, it, it seems to us
to be a good way of, um,
making the link in with, with other part, other legislation.
Um, and in particular the, um, addressing,
well, first of all, defining what
safeguards mean would be another one.
Um, but the schedule seven, which, which is,
which talks about, um, protect options, there could be some,
um, drafting instructions around the, um, that this applies
to other adaptive options.
So it's not just protect, protect in a generic sense,
but it's always interpreted
to mean putting hard protection in in
place. And in terms of
The links with the other legislation
Yeah, the link, the links, um,
I made a comment about I think the building act, um, how
that could be, um, linked section 71
and 73, um, prohibits building where land is pro prone
to natural hazards, but that's e easily overcome
because of this problem with defaulting first
to mitigation of remedying. Yeah.
And the permit, which goes to your permit Yeah.
Point as well. Um,
and also if you're going to be looking at ways in which
adaptation can be triggered in the act, there would need
to be a direction to use, um, adaptive planning
that is dynamic.
So it's not just letting something happen and then reacting,
but doing something in anticipation, identifying
and giving yourself time to link into
new infrastructure, different types of infrastructure
and different options for, um, mitigating those risks.
Just one quick question that I had,
'cause um, I was the 1 1 4 6 that you're talking about that
and the primary production exclusion you say exposes the
crown and local government to ongoing post-event cleanups
and land repair similar to what we saw in Esque Valley.
Can you just elaborate a little bit on
That? Well, well, my reading
of the act is, it's excluded
by the Planning Act and so to include
that in the planning act will make sense.
So it was actually aligning it better
with the Emergency Management Act.
So are you, so, so just make, so I'm,
I'm just a bit confused there about
what you are recommending.
That's the section 1 4 6.
Righto. I'll just, uh,
And the concern that you have around it,
the primary production exclusion exposing the crown
and local government to ongoing post-event
cleanups and land repair.
Yeah, well there are some exclusions in the act, um, in,
in, in the bill, sorry.
Um, which it mean that the, those,
those activities are not covered.
So in, in primary productive, um,
app applications relating
to primary production for consents.
So then are you saying that,
so then if there was an event like Cyclone Gabrielle,
which wiped out all of the Yeah.
Land, the primary production land mm-hmm.
That there is currently excluded.
Well that's my understanding reading it,
but I think that needs to be checked. Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. No, no, no. Really
interesting.
I was just interested in
that point 'cause yeah, it's a good point.
Um, and just a tiny up to my other question, um, when,
when you're talking about dynamic, that dynamic planning,
mm, I I think I, I see, um, you referenced clause 80,
but I think you're talking about something more than that.
Yes. And I was just wondering if you had any examples
of the sort of wording that would provide
for dynamic planning?
Yeah. Or if you could think about that.
Yeah. Um, local authorities over the last 10 years have
been increasingly using adapt dynamic adaptive pathways
planning as a method to identify, um, those
activities at risk, which, um,
and developing options that can be, um, implemented
through the planning process.
And this is being done widely now for infrastructure
and it's being used for, um,
coastal uh, developments.
Um, and so there are the examples
that was used in the Hawkes Bay, it was used in, uh,
for the coastal planning work.
It was used in in Auckland in, uh, tha del,
um, Amberley.
Yeah. Um, I mean it's been used widely rou
around New Zealand and it's found to be very useful for,
um, working with dynamic change,
but it can only, um, have implement,
it can only be implementable
by having some trigger in the legislation.
Yeah. Yeah, that's
Judy, we're gonna have to leave it there.
Yeah, yeah. Um, there's many more
questions I'm sure we could ask.
Really useful submission.
Um, and we really appreciate your time on
it and all the work that you've done. So thank
You. Yeah, thank, thank you very much
and I'm happy
to provide any other detailed, um,
feedback if you wish to have that.
No, appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Look,
We'll move on to our next submission now,
who is Craig Pauling?
And Craig, we can see you there.
You've popped up, you've got 10 minutes with us,
so we'll hand it over to you.
And apologies I couldn't be there, uh, in person today.
Um, and just by way of background, um,
I have 25 over 25 years experience working within the
resource management, environmental management, uh, areas
across community iwi, local government,
central government, and the private sector.
Uh, and while this interface is not always a smoother ride.
It has been very fruitful in terms of outcomes for our tile,
our community, as well as economically and socially.
And I'll point to the outcomes driven, uh,
from partnership under the Na Tahu settlement.
Uh, those partnerships with the Department of Conservation,
with our local councils
and on the ground in our communities, uh, via the joint work
to rebuild ot, Tahi, uh, and Kakoda
after our devastating earthquakes, uh,
through the joint work to restore to Horta Lake
and Lagoon, uh,
and to get NA representatives, uh,
on environment Canterbury, which was done by successes
of governments initiated, uh, by national, um,
and where I had the honor of serving as a counselor, uh,
deputy chair and chairperson.
Um, and to start with, I just wanna start with a fact, um,
from our MFE Ministry for the Environment website,
which is probably a little, little known
and not talked about that much,
but critical in the context of these bills.
And that is that 94%
of all resource consent applications are granted
and 82%, uh, process within statutory timeframes
and only taught two to 4%, uh, notified.
Um, and when I went to university, 82% was a,
was a a, which is pretty good.
Um, so the question is, is it broken?
Um, or a better question is, could it be better?
And the answer to that is most definitely, it can be better.
And, uh, to that end, I worked on the pre,
and I wanna acknowledge the work on the previous, uh,
legislation, the Natural Built Environment Act,
and the Spatial Planning Act, um,
because that was done with a lot of critical analysis, uh,
a lot of engagement, uh, and obviously the Ranon report.
Um, the same cannot be said for
what we currently are looking at.
Um, and so what has been proposed, um, has serious problems,
I believe, um, that if unchanged have the potential
to set not only our environment,
but our communities, our councils, our government systems,
and our economy back.
Um, I listened to Tina Perot this morning who I have a lot
of respect for, um,
and concur with her about the importance of part two,
not only for our environmental protection and outcomes, uh,
but for the role of Mato Donga and Iwi Maori
and Resource Management and Environmental management.
This is unique. And the reason why Section six, E seven A
and eight were included in the original RMA our nation,
our experts, our politicians, knew that traditional
ecological knowledge is critical
for managing our unique flora, fauna,
and ecosystems
that exist in these most precious
islands in the South Pacific.
Um, these bills must be amended to have equivalent,
if not improved clauses
and purposes if we are to reverse the trends of decline.
And I'll point to another fact from, again,
from our MFE Ministry for the Environment website.
75% of our native species are threatened
or at risk of extinction.
45% of New Zealand's rivers do not meet national standards
for swimming or ecological health.
So it's clear that we need to do something
and need to do something better.
And purely maintaining where we're at is not good enough.
We must improve.
We must have restoration in our natural environment
and for our communities and for our economy.
So what can we do? Uh, as I've pointed out in my submission,
we need to strengthen our environmental protections,
and that is around part two.
Um, and the purpose,
and that should include things like climate changes, was,
uh, presented by our last submitter
and the Natural Built Environment Act had something
around this in terms of ANA or timmo
or elevating our environment to be the important thing
around this legislation.
We need to insert clear improvement requirements,
not just maintaining.
As I said, it's not good enough
because of those statistics that are read out.
Net gain is important, not no net net,
uh, sorry, no net loss.
Um, as other submitters have said, that leads,
that's like a flaw rather than a ceiling.
Um, and it leads to, um,
de degrading rather than reaching for outcomes.
And in my submission, I point to the idea of TU
or reciprocity for the natural world.
We should be, uh, including that within our legislation.
So that encourages
and incentivize, um, people that use natural resources
to give back to our natural world.
Um, and again, the Natural
and Built Environment Act had a dual framework included.
And I think this could be a game changer going forward
where applicants and applications
and activities are assessed not only on the impacts they
have on their environment, but
what outcomes they could achieve.
Uh, for example, net gain and biodiversity outcomes.
Just as one example. Um, we need to uphold utility
and strengthen the role of UA and marka.
Um, and again, that comes down to those, some
of those part two matters.
But as other speakers have said, the man, uh, agreements
that allow for true partnerships between local government
and central government, uh, and ua, uh,
and acknowledging those decision making roles that come from
that, things like joint management agreements
and transfer of powers are also gone from these bills.
Um, they're important pathways,
even though we haven't seen many of them.
Uh, so they're really important, removing regulatory relief,
um, and strengthening the positives that are in this, um,
in these bills around water conservation orders,
farm plans, joint planning.
But lastly, I think the most important thing is
to enhance integration.
And that's obviously to connect this
to the local government reform.
Um, and one key thing is about removing
the arbitrary, um, split we have between
how we manage the natural world, uh, currently in the RMA,
which I think's an era is
that we split land use from natural resource use.
And under this, these bills we're going further
and we're gonna split human health from
natural environment health.
Um, that is not the way
that we should manage the environment.
It should be integrated. Um, so that's something that needs
to be looked at, uh,
and I recommend that that gets closer,
closer attention in these bills.
Kilda
Kilda. Thank you, Craig.
Uh, look, we've got time for one question,
so we'll take it from Lan.
Craig, thank you so much for your submission today.
Um, I was noting in your submission,
you mentioned your 25 years of experience, including
being chair of Environment Canterbury.
Uh, as you'll probably be aware, the bill
very clearly sets out that there won't be
clear environmental direction at a national level,
but that those limits will be set at a regional level.
What is the Canterbury experience over the last few decades
and and what, what has that led to?
Um, I think when we, you know,
when we have a good functioning, uh,
national guidance, that really helps.
So the NPS for freshwater 2020, for example,
and even the earlier, um, uh, iterations of them,
they set good guidance.
They set a framework, uh,
and we're all working towards that.
Unfortunately, with some of the changes
to the RMA in the last few years, especially, uh, last year
and before that scared a lot of councils off
and they ended up not following through with their plans,
even though we'd spent millions of dollars on them.
Um, so I think with good, uh,
clear direction from the center
and science-based, um, nonpolitical, uh,
national bottom lines, I think that's really important.
Uh, the national objectives framework was really critical.
Um, but again, that's been sort of taken away.
And I think, uh, having, um, regional
and, um, national splits is, is not great.
Um, I think it needs to be brought together in one place,
and then, uh, the regulators do their job of regulating, uh,
at the, at the regional level.
Look, thank you very much, Craig.
We have met time today
and appreciate your time, so thank you.
Okay, KDA. So for those following at home,
we are running, uh, about 10 minutes behind time.
We're going to take a break now.
Uh, and then we will resume at 10, past four.
Very good.
Oh my goodness. Slightly, we still,
Right.
So we are resuming our public submissions
on the planning bill and Natural Environment Bill,
and we have our next submitter with us this afternoon.
Marie, uh, we can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
We will hand it over to you. You have 10 minutes with us.
Thank you very much. And thank you
for the opportunity to present.
I know not all got that.
Um, my submission obviously conveys that I have a range
of concerns with the proposals.
Um, my background is in RMA and as an implementation,
and I consider that I have a reasonable expert background
to provide some judgment on what's been proposed.
I'm aware, though that you've probably heard 700,000
versions of very similar concerns.
So what I'm trying to do today is just focus on the sort
of unique points that I might make.
They're a bit nerdy, but hopefully they'll be helpful.
And just take my broader submission.
Um, as read you, you might've seen from the covering letter
that I'm a bit cross with some aspects of the proposal, and,
and I think I made that clear.
Um, but I also know that people don't really want
the resource management system flopping
around in a fish bucket for another three years, uh,
promising further volatility.
Um, and, and that's the, that's the, the issue we have
around how do we make this work?
Can we make it work or do we need to go there again?
Um, because the alternative would be to bring in a,
a deeply flawed and undercooked system that we will need
to apologize to our children for.
And that doesn't sound like a very good idea either.
I think there's quite a lot of work
to make these even functional, let alone broadly acceptable.
And I think that that concerns me particularly, um,
having been involved in the Natural
and Built Environment Act imperfect, though it was, um,
it certainly appeared to have a broader base of support.
It's not all lost. There are some strengths.
It's lovely to see water conservation orders,
our freshwater National Park instrument retained.
I think that's very positive.
It's nice to see the system performance framework.
I think that starts to give us a basis
for much more effective system
and performance monitoring of, of statutory interventions.
I think that's a good thing,
depending on how it's implemented.
A single plan per region just makes a lot of sense.
Uh, and also as the architect
of the refresh compliance regime in the NBA, it is great
to see it coming back in.
So I think there are some strengths,
but I worry that they are going to be severely constrained
by the widespread deregulation present in the upper
reaches of the bills.
Uh, and, and the plethora of new instruments
and new terms, some of which are undefined.
I think they're going to constrain
practice quite considerably.
So I wanna make two points.
And the first is about workability,
which is a point from someone in RM implementation.
My whole career, uh, is that these tools need to be ready
to go on day one.
They need to be functional,
and they need to be well designed.
And quite a number of those new instruments
are very undercooked.
They have some quite fundamental flaws,
and they need a lot more time,
more time, probably than we have.
And certainly an awful lot for a select committee
to contend with.
I am strenuously opposed, for example, to regulatory relief
for the reasons I won't bore you with,
but a detail in my submission
and no doubt the submission of many others.
But I think a minimum expectation of these tools is
that they're workable and they're fair.
So in the event that regulatory relief is retained,
I do think there are two important changes needed
to the policy before you.
And the first is some measure of transparency
where regulatory relief is distributed to whom
and for what purpose should be a matter of public record.
These requirements are not yet clear in the provisions.
And secondly, if they're given to a landowner
for the purpose of protecting particular values,
and those values are subsequently lost,
there should be a clawback mechanism in place,
and it should dock cleanly into the compliance regime
because that should sit in the, in the band
of egregious offending by anybody's means.
So those are my, um, what I implore you with
regarding regulatory relief, noting
that I strenuously oppose the concept.
The second thing is that the use of the word monitoring
and compliance and the resource management regime has always
been quite vexed because there's lots of different kinds
of monitoring in RM reform and, and r systems generally.
One is to see whether the agencies are doing their job,
so agency performance monitoring.
The other is to monitor whether plans
interventions are effective.
Um, although we do those two very much less than we should,
they're still unique forms of monitoring.
We have another form of monitoring being introduced in this,
um, set of proposals,
and that is monitoring whether environmental
limits are complied with.
Uh, and then of course we have compliance monitoring
and enforcement, which relates to the regulated obligations
of individuals and other parties
that are set out in things like consent conditions, uh,
and national rules.
Now, this may seem like a very simple issue,
but in reading a range of submissions, it's obvious
that many people have conflated their comments on one,
uh, with with others.
So they've made, for example, broad general comments, um,
about the trajectory of travel
and respect of state of the environment monitoring
that actually relates
to the compliance provisions and vice versa.
It's going to get quite confusing.
So I make two suggestions.
The first is that the word compliance is only used in the
enforcement space of the bill.
And, and perhaps something else is used around the limits.
Environmental limits,
something like adherence alignment, take your pick.
But compliance is gonna create quite considerable system
confusion, and I think it will create confusion even in the
interpretation of submissions.
And the second is, there's an opportunity here for the bills
to perhaps introduce a taxonomy for the types of monitoring,
because it is used in an ordinate number
of times throughout the bills,
and it means different things depending on its context.
And I wonder if there's a simple practical option here
to introduce a taxonomy, uh,
because this has been a longstanding challenge
in resource management law.
And I think that's a, an opportunity for a fix
that could be quite practical and quite useful.
So that's all from me. Sorry, I didn't make five minutes,
but I got very close.
No, thank you. Marie, we've got a question from Rachel.
Yes, thanks Marie. And thank you for the, that, um,
supplementary paper with all your suggestions in it.
That's very, very helpful.
And for all your work on CME,
I was wondering if you can just talk
to us a little bit about where you see if you were in charge
of everything, um, the role of the EPA in,
in the CME space.
It's an interesting question
because I know that the concept
of a national regulator was spoken about in the EAG report,
but it wasn't really about the EPA.
So it's a bit, it's a bit
confusing to know where this is going.
So I'll answer your question in terms of
what is the strengths of the concept
of a national regulator.
Uh, and I think a national regulator has great merit
in the regional system.
It doesn't have to be an only,
it can be a supplementary as it is now.
Um, but it has the opportunity to deal
with national scale issues, to deal perhaps with operators
that operate nationally
and are common kind of issue for every, every council.
It has the opportunity to, um, provide, I guess,
general practice notes that sit across the sector
and improve the sort of quality of delivery.
Um, and it has the opportunity to provide, uh,
an expert hub, if you like, for some
of the more complex compliance instruments such as those,
um, proposed like a monetary benefit order.
Uh, when that was conceived, the idea was
that the national regulator would probably have
that expertise rather than expect every council
to have a forensic accountant on call,
which they probably don't have.
So I think there's lots of merit there.
Um, but as to whether it's an in addition to
or an only, I think that's a really big conversation,
but I think there's some merit.
But the main point I would make is that the vast majority
of environmental regulatory expertise in New Zealand is
nested in our regional councils.
And so there shouldn't be this assumption
that the central regulator will know more.
In fact, there's an expertise asymmetry in which the
regional councils are miles ahead of, um,
our national entities in lots of circumstances.
So just wanna caution against the assumption
that the expertise sits centrally, in fact, it's distributed
through the system, particularly in the councils
that have been most active in that space. Is that helpful?
That's very helpful, thank you. Thank you.
We've got time for one last question from Lan
Qua Marie. Thank
you for that.
Uh, really my question is, I guess a follow on from Rachel's
because we have had varying, uh,
submissions and opinions on the Wildlife Act
clause that has popped up in the bill.
Um, some people are saying that actually the RMA
and the systems that regional councils has
is actually adequate to, I guess, provide
that knowledge about, particularly say, threatened species
or rare indigenous biodiversity.
What is your view in your work across, I guess,
the RM system and the conservation space, whether this,
this actually can be a functional clause that
regional councils or whatever the council system ends up
being could actually make those determinations under
the Wildlife Act or not?
I think it's a good question,
and it's not a simple answer.
I think it's, um, it's partly about
what species are we talking about, literally in terms of
where that expertise resides, um, and, and what ecosystem
and what particular environment we're talking about.
I think it will be wildly different
where in some the expertise is wholly nested within the
Department of Conservation
and others where it's distributed
to all parts of the system.
The second thing is, what are the incentives on the agency
and what are the, what is the statutory
mandate with regional council?
So you have a much more mixed mandate than you do
for the Department of Conservation.
I think that's relevant.
Um, I think the, the assertion
that they can't ever do it is probably not correct.
DOC has lost a lot of its science capacity over the last 10,
15 years on, you know, sadly.
And a lot of that has gone to the regions.
So I don't think it, we need to make the broad assumption
that they can't possibly cope with the task.
My worry would be on the incentives
and the pressure, uh, to issue things
because it will be seen
as the last little hand break when all
of the other consenting is done.
So, so that's my concern.
Um, but I don't think I have a binary view.
Uh, but I think that, um, like a lot of the proposals,
there's just not enough detail
and enough chance to talk it through.
So that makes me uncomfortable.
But I think it could work,
but it does depend on, on all of those stars aligning
and the right expertise being at place.
'cause fundamentally, that's what you want
for evidence-based decision making
is the expertise at place.
And then of course, the data.
Look, thank you very much, Marie.
We will have to leave it there,
but appreciate your valuable submission
and as Rachel said, the, the great layout table there with,
um, you know, all your recommendations,
obviously a lot in support of what's there as well.
Um, so appreciate, um, all your comments there.
So, uh, we must move on. Thank you. Thank
You. Thanks.
Uh, so we now welcome our next submitter,
the New Zealand King Salmon, who is with us in person.
Welcome, Quentin, to the Select Committee this afternoon.
You have 20 minutes with us, so I see you've been kind
of listening in through the process.
So, uh, we look forward to your submission.
So we will hand it over to you.
Uh, uh, uh, Koto, um, called Quentin Davies talking.
Well, my name is Quentin Davies.
I'm here representing New Zealand King Salmon.
Um, I have circulated some speaking notes,
which will just help me, um, move through more quickly and,
and get to questions more quickly.
Um, the first aspect I wanted
to introduce New Zealand King Salmon, um,
and their operations in the resource management space.
Um, then talk about aquaculture's potential
and then make three points, one of which, um, supportive
of existing provisions in the, in the, in the bill.
Um, um, and then two, um,
suggesting some areas of change.
Uh, and then at the last page of the speaking notes,
there's a list of the other matters which I dealt
with in the written submission, which I'm not gonna talk
to today, but happy to answer any questions.
So, um, New Zealand King Salmon is the world's
largest producer of King salmon.
It's still the proudest, uh, proud owner
of marine farming licensed one, which was a,
a licensed grant under the 1971 Act.
And fast and forward 55 years.
It's in the process of commissioning, um,
new Zealand's first open ocean salmon farm in Western
Cook Strai called Blue Endeavor.
Um, the companies use utilize the best
of international technology
and is adapting that for use, um, here in New Zealand
to New Zealand conditions.
Um, and from 17 hectares of surface, um, uh,
17 surface hectares of salmon farming space
that produces 50% of the world's, um,
farm New Zealand king salmon
and apply employs about 440 people across, um, te Toi, who,
um, the potential for aquaculture is vast.
Um, Norwegians, um, uh,
the Norwegian salmon industry farms a different species.
It farms Atlantic salmon,
but that, uh, industry is more, more than 80 times.
Um, new Zealand's, um, industry.
Um, obviously first world country, um, um, first world, uh,
economic performance requirements, um, in that jurisdiction.
Um, but a significantly larger industry, um, in New Zealand.
Um, if it had more directive regulation could, um,
grow within sustainable limits
and help the government reach its tar target
under the national develop.
Uh, the act development plan, which I'll return
to, um, in a moment.
Um, paragraph three deals with, um, the, uh, the problem
of the Resource Management Act, uh, act
and listening today,
I don't think I necessarily need to labor that.
Um, it has turned into a very complex, costly,
and uncertain system, um, blue endeavor, uh, for example,
um, seven years and $7 million, uh, to grant consent.
And, um, the company looks forward
to better regulation under both bills.
One aspect, which I want to highlight, which is important,
um, from King Salmon's perspective, is
that there is a principle in the bill, um, that, uh,
decisions are made as early as possible.
Um, one of the flaws under the Resource Management Act
as one defers a decision, um, um, through the process.
Uh, and it's only at the consenting stage, uh,
or, uh, on, on appeal, uh, from the consenting stage
that one discovers whether or not, uh, the, uh,
application can be granted or declined.
And so, um, one of the aspects which, um,
we do see heart in this bill, um, is, is the principle
that we make decisions as, as the soon
as we've got the industry information at the highest
instrument possible.
Um, and, um, um, the consequences of not getting
that right is of course, to spend a lot of money.
Um, and, um, um, the King Salmon decision, um, uh,
the Supreme Court decision as an example where, um, uh, um,
where the, the, uh, proposed farm was, uh, adjacent,
um, to, um, the area of about financial landscape.
And we discovered at the Supreme Court level that in fact,
um, the farm was not consentable, uh, and
therefore that was refused.
Um, if the plan had,
or if, if the planning instruments had made
that decision much earlier up the chain, um,
the money wouldn't need, have needed to be spent.
Um, and, um, it could have been, uh,
allocated somewhere else.
Um, the sort of in that vein, um,
New Zealand King Salmon seeks the additional
of a new agriculture specific goal, includes 11
of national environment bill, uh,
and the planning bill, I say the planning bill
because, um, it may be
that agriculture requires consent under both.
Um, that's a, a, a matter which, um, the submission, uh,
addresses, uh, one of its details.
But certainly, um, in the natural environment, bill,
there should be a new, uh, agriculture specific goal
in the NEB, there's no goal that seeks to provide
for the needs of current and future generations.
It is government policy that the agriculture industry, uh,
needs to grow to a $3 billion industry by 2035.
And as I point out in my written submissions,
that was also the previous government's, um, um, uh,
policy goal, uh, both the agriculture development plan
and the agriculture strategy, uh, recognize the need
for integration between fish, water hatcheries,
appropriate land site,
and port, uh, infrastructure, as well as the right mix vent
and open ocean marine farming space
appropriate for the conditions.
Uh, we can't generate the export income without having a,
all of the, um, infrastructure in place from, from plate.
A new goal for aquaculture in both bills would recognize
that multi, multi support the industry, it would recognize
that any farming operation needs to be focused first
and foremost on fish welfare.
It would recognize that aquaculture requires clean food
production, and what is good
for the fish will be good for us all.
And it will recognize that aquaculture can improve the
wellbeing of New Zealand, and we're making that decision
as early as possible in the hierarchy.
And that would flow through to policies and plans.
If it's not in, uh, in, um, the, the,
the higher order documentation, um, councils won't, um,
put priorities on that.
Um, and we've got examples that from the 2004 reforms, uh,
where councils were given the opportunities to, um, plan
for additional agriculture.
Uh, and there was very little additional agriculture, uh,
planned for as a result of, um, that legislation
could be an argument that clause 11, um,
gold grow the agriculture industry might be said to put
to the agriculture industry too much on a pedestal.
However, under the RMA, there are 76 sections,
which expressly identify agriculture
by name will provide special rules which apply
to agriculture and the allocation
of coastal space more generally, most
of those provisions have been bought through in the NEB, um,
and the context of that, that there's already, um,
significant special provision made for agricul.
Um, under the current legislation
and under the proposed legislation,
an aquaculture goal is not out place.
Uh, New Zealand Kings Salmon also supports an additional sub
goal to enable aquaculture activities, uh,
within agriculture settlement areas
to provide for Maori interests.
TA significant marine farmers, uh, including in partnership
with New Zealand King, uh, its government policy
that Iwi led agricul development can provide, uh,
greater economic and social benefits, the community.
Uh, and my final point, which I wish to highlight today, um,
is the overlap between, uh, the NEB and other statutes.
And the planning bill is a provision which says, um,
if it's regulated under another statute,
you must disregard that matter.
Uh, but that's not something which has been brought
across to the NEB.
Um, so the planning board provision is supported,
but the equivalent provision needs to be brought across, um,
to, um, the NEB.
Um, and there's a number of examples
where there are overlaps between legislation.
One is biosecurity, uh, another,
although controversially, um,
because there's disagreement under the RMA as to whether
or not animal welfare is relevant.
This is something in my submission that, uh,
that would affect all primary producers.
It's not just in that culture specific matter.
Uh, and there's a number of, um, areas in, in,
in paragraph 15 where I suggest there may be some overlap
between, um, between other legislation, which has, um, it,
its job to address those effects.
Um, and, um,
and the Resource Management Act
where you've effectively got a, a double regulation.
Um, and the solution to that is provision in the EEB, um,
which, which mirrors, um, the planning bill, clause 14
final page is a list of the other matters that I deal
with my written submissions.
But happy to take questions.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much for that submission.
Um, Ryan has the first question.
Uh, thanks Chair. Um, thanks
for your submission, obviously.
Yeah. Quite a quite interesting history
with your experience on the bleeding edge, as it were with
RMA and, and the law.
Um, in your talking points here, you talk about seven years
and $7 million.
Yes. Where does that $7 million go?
Is it lawyers, consultants? Yep. Who does it shoot up?
Um, um, so, uh, part of, part of the problem with me, um,
obviously as a, as a lawyer in that project, um, um, um,
we were responsible for some of that.
Um, al also had to discover, um,
because there was very little information about the state
of the environment before we applied for consent.
So we had to undertake Maori beam surveys, we had to employ,
uh, benthic scientists, marine scientists,
and then we were going and taking, um, a,
an established piece of equipment,
but putting it in a new area.
And so we had to go
and justify that there wasn't gonna be an effects on
seabirds, marine mammals, um, um,
the lighting wasn't gonna cause an effect,
there wasn't a navigation issue.
So it's just, you have to go through all of the, the,
the potential issues which might arise, um,
and effectively tick those off.
Yeah. And then, um,
the national policy statements at the time
created a hard edge.
I, this has created some concern at the moment
'cause there's been no visibility to
what those might look like.
Mm. What what's your position on that?
Are you, do you feel like you're flying blind
or you have some comfort that your precedent will help
shape a better outcome? Or,
I mean, king Salmon has used the, in appropriate, sorry,
the inefficient, um, system
of the Resource Management Act to get space.
So we are reasonably confident
that we can make an environmental case, um, not irrespective
of the legislation, but, but, but,
but we are reasonably confident that, that we will be able
to get space if and when we need it.
It's simply the opportunity cost that one loses
by putting in barriers in place.
And so, um, um,
but I mean, we, we are trusting that the process
that follows on from this, um,
will produce some workable regulation. Just a
Quick final question. Um,
you refer us the, the concept
of special circumstances, you want them gone.
Is that akin to third party appeal rights at the extreme?
Or where do you see that?
So in under the Resource Management Act, um, um,
notification decisions can be made,
even if it's a minor effect on the environment.
Someone can make a decision
that there's special circumstances
and you're going to notify an application regardless.
Um, we don't see a case for that.
So it's either, if it's consistent with policy
and there's, um, environmental effects
and minor, um, uh, I mean the categories are weird.
Um, um, the special circumstances have been raised fairly
narrow, and we can,
and we simply say there's no, there's no, um, basis
for continuing that on in policy
Care. And I might just
have a supplementary
of that while we're on this topic.
'cause Yeah, I visited King Salmon, um,
and, you know, looked at the,
that quite extraordinary blue endeavor
and the opportunity that there is there, I mean,
you spoke about Scandinavia, Norway, obviously, um,
you know, doing this already.
Uh, what's the potential to be doing more
of it in New Zealand?
Ab a absolutely.
So, um, um, water temperature is obviously a key issue,
but, um, but the east coast of the South island, um,
has perfect water temperature.
Um, um, the question then becomes the appropriate
infrastructure for farming in that location.
Mm-hmm. Um, but again, I mean,
the Norwegians are leading a charge,
but in the middle of the Atlantic, a a,
a small islands called the Pharaohs, um,
which have got even stronger winds if possible, than, um,
experienced in, in Wellington today.
Um, and, and, and,
and they have this technology which
they've, which they've used,
And that was the amazing thing with the technology, right?
Like it's, there's quite high environmental kind
of compliance as well.
That's right. With the, with the new
technologies that are available.
That's right. This is, um, uh, I mean,
once you're moving offshore,
you are moving into a very dynamic environment.
Um, I mean, sort of the drop in the ocean is a little bit,
um, um, uh, a little bit glib,
but it is, um, uh,
it is a small activity in a very large space.
Mm-hmm. Um, and, um, you know, many of the concerns
that exist in terms of, uh, insure areas, um, um,
although King Salmon's worked through those as well, um,
but, um, they don't exist when you move offshore. So
Just quickly find me, so if you were to see,
if you were setting up another one, um,
and having to go through the consent process,
would you see the new system working better for a,
uh, consenting regime?
Yeah, well, one would hope so.
I mean, the, the one assumes that the, um, that the,
that the, uh, subordinate legislation
that follows is going to be workable.
But yes, um, um, the, the goal orientated, the,
um, the focus on, um, solving actual problems rather than,
um, trying to optimize every little activity, um,
those sorts of things are, are, are, are positives.
Okay. Thank you, Rachel.
Yeah, just a little clarification
and then two small questions.
Did you say when you were talking about the agriculture
goal, that it's similar, a few
different architecture, different legislation,
but it's basically similar to all the provisions
that are in the RMA at the moment?
And did you also say the Natural and Built Environments Act,
or were you just talking about the NEB?
I'm sorry, there's too many NE and As and
Bs. So, so,
so, um, as I understand, one of the issues
that needs to be worked through is which act is aquaculture,
um, regulated on, or is it both?
Um, it's a little bit unclear at the moment.
I trust that that'll be that, that,
that, that that'll be resolved.
So that's 0.1. Um, 0.2.
Um, so, so once you've made that decision,
you would then decide under which, um, act
or both, um, you would put the goal, um, sorry,
I've forgotten the, um, your next question.
It was just, um, the comparative, your justification
for having a specific agriculture goal was
that it's actually equivalent sort of
to all the different numbers of provisions
that are in the RMA at the moment.
And, and then I was wondering also if you were referencing
Labor's legislation or it was,
Uh, no. So I, I'm
talking about this legislation.
Um, so if I talked about the, uh, the,
the national environment bill is NEB Jehovah referred to.
Um, but in terms of the, um, the, the justification, um,
there are a large number
of aquaculture specific provisions
under all three.
So RMA labor's proposal and the current proposal.
Um, and, and that's for a number of reasons, um,
but having an agricul specific goal,
because you've got so much, so many, um,
provisions which relate to agriculture,
but you don't have a goal in respect of it.
It just looks a little bit odd.
So if you do a search of agricul
and, um, any of the bills, um, you end up with, um,
80 in the RMA and 50 odd in the NEB.
Um, and that's, um, and that's
because a large number
of the resource management provisions are being pulled over.
But it's also because, um, agriculture requires, um,
in some circumstances slightly different form
of regulation than, than other, other activities.
Yeah. And, and,
and that's why I say, um, having a goal
for aquaculture is justifiable
because you've got, um, roughly 10% of the provisions
of the bill dealing with, with, with,
with aquaculture as a special case.
I noted. Thank you. Uh, LAN has her hand up.
Thanks for your submission.
Um, just on the kind of special case for aquaculture,
can you help the committee understand, um,
I guess the context of your submission?
Because is it correct that, you know, all
of your consents have been, there was a blanket extension
for all, at least the coastal permit consents out to 2050.
So are you just sort of, you are talking about new consents
that might come online, new aquaculture development,
but is it right in saying basically whatever this,
these acts end up being, there won't be
any impact on you outside to 2050
because you've already got
consents grounded to them? Is that correct?
Yeah, so, so King salmon is, um, all its high.
So, um, most of which fish are produced, um,
by high flow sites, um, tend to be, um, larger sites.
All of those consents have been recently recons consented,
um, and obviously Blue Endeavor is a very
recent consent as well.
Um, so yes, um, king Salmon did benefit from the, um,
from the enlargement of, of, of time, um,
in I think the 2024 legislation.
Um, but we are talking about new legislation
and I think the, the government policy
and as well as the, um, the former government's policy, um,
both of which, um, wanted the env uh, the, um, the, uh,
agriculture industry to grow, um, to 3 billion by 2035.
Um, and to do that, um, there needs to be not only, um,
new seawater assets,
but also there needs to be the corresponding, um, um, um,
onshore assets, freshwater hatcheries, um,
port infrastructure, um,
and then, um, um, the ability to get, um, um,
the product market, um, all of that needs to be joined up.
Um, and that's what, uh, in, in, in our view,
a goal for agriculture would link back to that, um, um,
link back to that strategy.
Um, and then, um, uh, sorry, link back to
that development plan, um,
and then, um, be able to take all of that forward.
There's no point in, in having more, um, seawater space,
for example, if you don't have more hatchery space.
Mm. So you've got to think about the system as a whole.
Um, and, and in order to, um, to facilitate
that development, we need, um, um, well, we need,
we can achieve it on our own,
but, um, in order to accelerate that, um, um, which is, uh,
better for the nation, um, um, uh, having a goal to achieve
that is, is a, is a better outcome.
Look, thank you very much
for your submission this afternoon.
Uh, it's really good to get an culture
perspective, so thanks very much. No problem.
Thank you. Right.
Safe in the wind. Yes.
We will now move to our next submitter, uh, Peter Law,
who is with us in person.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon, Peter.
Thank you. You have 10 minutes with us. Good.
So we, we'll hand over to you.
Thank you very much. Um, um,
my professional life has been involved with,
uh, construction and real estate.
Um, hence my interest in one of my interests in this area,
but I've also been involved in, um,
environmental groups for over 20 years.
And in my private life, um, my objection in,
in my, um, submission, um, to re represent
recognition of Tikanga on land not owned by them, um,
based on a false historical native narrative about treaty
obligations, um, tikanga leads to an unfair advantage,
um, also on special planning committees, um,
whether they apply to public or private land.
Um, I have absolutely no objection to the involvement
of Iwi, um, in any of any of these activities,
but not automatically
and in advance of other parties who may discover the impact
of a, of, of a plan when it is way down the track.
Um, I'll be recently be involved in an environmental group,
um, which is in the public space, objecting to the,
involve the policies of a regional council, um, which we
identify as having a very bad impact on the environment.
Um, now the iwi we're in consulting in from the very
beginning, um,
and our group was kept outta the process by, by officers
of the council who had a, per a predefined vision.
Now, again, absolutely no involve objection
to the involvement of the, of the iwi,
but, um, they had an automatic right to be in on this,
and we, we were excluded by, by the officers
of the, uh, of the council.
Um, and that's when you've got a,
when you've got an environmental group,
at least you've got a few people to get together
and sort of fight, fight the fight.
But for private individuals who are faced with, um,
even if their draft decisions made on in advance of, of,
um, of, of a situation, um,
have very little chance of defending their rights, um,
especially if is involved, which is a, um,
a basically a set of rules which is divine decided
by the local iwi following whatever they decide is right.
Um, not following any kind of, um, uh, documented,
um, legal background that, um,
the average in individual's gonna be aware of.
Um, so that's essentially my, my objection.
Um, and, um, um, the,
um, EWI
and Harper are basically given control, um, over land owned
by non-Maori and extensively throughout this pill.
And it's, it is based on some kind of, um,
false historical narrative in terms of what,
what the, the treaty says.
Um, I think if you actually studied
what the treaty says about, um, some of these issues, um,
you might get a different, um, it's one of,
Okay. Well, thank
you for that, Peter.
Um, w you said you were in the building
and construction sector.
Did have you had experience with, with these issues
that you are raising today?
Um, well, Volvo, well construction, um,
and real estate, um, which sort of overlapped
to some degree, um, where I'm just aware
of the challenges of,
of doing anything in the private sector, um, in the area
of real estate and in construction, um,
and having, um, parties
who may have a, um,
an interest in, um, being involved in your business, um,
when they have no involvement or legal involvement.
They don't own the property, they don't own the land.
Um, just, it's just, it doesn't add up.
It doesn't make sense. It's, um, um,
yeah, that's, that's, that's what what it's about. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you, Peter. Well, um, we've got a couple
of questions that have just come
through online here. So we'll start with Cameron.
Thank you, chair. Um, hey, Peter, in your,
in your written submission, um,
you make mention about like if, uh, wahi tap is located, um,
on private land, um,
pe people might avoid, uh, disclosure.
Do you think having a, um,
Regi regulatory relief structure in which, um, discovery of,
uh, wahi Tapu land
or wa wahi tapu on land, um, will be seen
as a net positive for all involved?
If, if those who discover it can find compensation
for the no longer being able to use their land, um,
in any way that they otherwise deemed they would've?
Um, I really have an opinion on that. Yeah. Okay.
Um, I, I just don't know that, I just don't dunno the, what
that process would involve. Um,
Well, it would involve, um, compensation, um,
based on not being able to use the land, uh,
where Wahi Tappi was discovered or found.
This is w tapi over private land.
Yes, I can, I totally support, um,
war tapa over Maori land.
Um, they've got every right to, um, provide that,
but over private land, I, I'm struggling to see, see the,
the legitimacy of that.
Thank you. Um, Deborah Russell has got a question.
Sorry, Peter, uh, um, uh, it's just a follow up.
I, I didn't quite catch what you said.
In reply to Catherine, have you had personal experience
of this in your own building and construction business?
Um, no. No, I haven't. No.
Right. Thank you. No, this,
I just didn't quite catch your answer there.
So this is based on what other people have said to you.
I, it's based on my, uh, uh, knowledge of, um,
how you build things in New Zealand and how you, so,
and what rights you have evidence.
Do you have specific examples of this happening?
Um, not at, not at this point, no.
Okay. No, that's all right. I was just trying
to clarify that, so thank you.
Sure, sure. Look, well, thank you very much, Peter,
for taking the time to come and give us your views today.
Really appreciate your submission, so thank you.
No worries. Thank you.
Um, right, we will, uh, welcome our next submitter, uh,
Mattias, uh, Mattias,
who is obviously joining us online.
And there we go. We can see you there.
Mathias, welcome to the Select committee this afternoon.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Uh, good afternoon. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you, yeah.
Okay, great.
Uh, first, uh, I would like to give a bit of background
how I became interested in resource management matters,
and then I will talk about, uh,
some specific provisions in the bill.
Uh, so my wife and I,
we bought a property in 2020 here in rural Taman,
and we let someone park a caravan on our paddock.
And this woman then lived in the caravan.
Um, and at the time, I think there,
I thought there was no problem in terms
of resource management
because there were no adverse environmental effects.
Then a few months later, um,
after she brought the carvan here to our place,
the test district council started their enforcement action
against us.
Um, the enforcement officers came with police
and a search warrant, and we were detained, uh,
while taking care of a child, uh, which was 1-year-old.
Back then, our property was searched, uh,
photographs were taken,
a drone was flying over the property,
and that was really an unpleasant experience to the least.
Um, and after that, the council didn't send,
did not send us an abatement notice or infringement fine,
or, but instead they filed an application
with the Environment court, uh,
for an enforcement order against us.
But at that point, it was still not clear
what we have, what we did wrong.
Um, only after two years
after these proceeding, um, they said for the first time,
the issue is that the caravan is considered a building
and it's considered fixed to the land.
And because of that, no one is allowed to live in there.
Um, in the end, the environment Court decided in the favor
of the council, um, the woman became effectively homeless,
and we lost in total more than
$140,000 in legal fees and cost to the council.
Um, why the Carolyn was fixed to land, um, considered fixed
to land the environment Court decided
because there were pipes
and an electric cable connected to it,
where we even took a video recording
and demonstrated that you can easily disconnect, uh,
the pipes and the cables within minutes
and tow the caravan away.
So, so actually in the video, you can see an empty spot,
the caravan away, it's not there anymore,
but still, the Environment Court decided the caravan is a
building that is fixed to the land.
And that basically brings me to some issues that
are apparent in the Resource Management Act,
and in my view, that are carried now over in,
into the planning bill.
Uh, first is the meaning of words.
Um, we have words like structure and fixed land
and building all over the bill
or the Resource Management Act,
but it's unclear what they actually mean.
And it seems to me, with every court case, there's more
and more uncertainty for landowners
because the meaning is so broad
that anything can be a building
or structure for, for example, uh,
the definition of building.
We, we have a building act, and I submitted,
or we submitted in court that this, this definition
of building from the Building Act should also apply in
resource management issues.
Uh, but the court rejected this.
Um, uh, we, we also refer to the national planning standards
that were drafted a few years ago.
And also in there we can see a difference
between objects placed on the land
and objects fixed on the land,
but also the court found that not relevant.
Uh, so as of today, it, it's still not clear
what is the building in the resource management context.
And I would like to suggest that we add, um,
definition for building, um, in, in,
in the bill or in the act.
Um, the same goes for fix to the land.
Um, what, what does it really mean there,
there's a longstanding legal concept from property law
that there's this distinction between movable
and immovable property, or,
or we sometimes call it shuttle and fixtures.
But again, the court decided in resource management context,
fixed to lands means something different me more context
specific to resource management,
but it's still unclear what it actually is.
Uh, the court said it's a case by case basis, what fixed
to land is, but that does not really help land owners.
They should know before, beforehand
what is actually allowed, what, what can they do
with their own private property without paying tens
of thousands of dollars in,
in legal fees, in court proceedings.
Um, I think a fundamental issue is
that there's too much discretion in regarding to the meaning
of words, but also, um, too much discretion
for the enforcement process itself.
Uh, for example,
it's unclear why in some cases the council issues an
abatement notice and someone can fix whatever the issue is.
But in our case, they went straight
to the environment court,
and which produced a lot of, um, financial damage,
so to say, on both sides for the rate payer on.
And for us, um, it, it's,
if we contrast this with the building Act, for example,
it's, it's very much clear what's going on.
There's a definition of building, uh, the council must, uh,
issue a notice to fix, then it goes to the district court,
and then there's a cost schedule in the district court.
So the process is clear, it's predictable,
and the risk is, yeah, the risk is manageable for the,
or limited for, for people involved.
Uh, but, but coming back to this bill, uh, that,
that we are talking about today, there continues
to be one significant issue
that we already had in the Resource Management Act.
It is that there can be enforcement actions against people
without any adverse effects on the environment.
And what I mean by this is the council
is putting rules in place, um, with the
good intent, I hope
to prevent negative effect on the environment.
But then when it comes to enforcement,
they must not prove any adverse environmental effect.
They can simply say, you break the rule,
no matter if there's an effect or not.
And because you break the rule, we start enforcement actions
and we bring you to court.
And I think that goes fundamentally against the purpose
of any resource management legislation,
which should have the intention
that we check the environment.
And if there is no negative impact on their environment,
and in my view, then there's nothing to be done here,
and we can focus on other issues
or spend, uh, rate payers money
on better things that they need.
Um, so yeah, that, that's, if I would have one point
that I could put into the new bill, then it's exactly this,
no enforcement, but, uh,
or let's say only enforcement,
if the council can prove there's an, uh,
adverse environmental effect.
I, I could take much longer
and much more issues that I
experienced over the last couple of years.
But in the interest of time, I'm, I'm happy
to take any questions you might have.
Look, Mattias, thank you, uh, for your submission
and obviously for sharing your personal experiences, um,
can appreciate that must have been very
stressful for you and your family.
Um, just wondering what, I mean,
what was the outcome in the end, um,
with your specific case in terms of the finding?
The outcome was basically, uh, the caravan is a building
because there's a electric cable and the pipe connected.
The outcome was, I lost, uh, we lost, my wife
and I, we lost $140,000.
Okay. And the women
that lived in there cannot live in their mind.
Now, what we tried, we, we went to the council, said, okay,
we removed the pipes, we removed the electric cable,
everything, what the environment, uh, said,
is it now compliant?
And guess what they say, no, it's still an issue
because the latest move force, they say it's still fixed
to land because of gravity,
and it's really hard to overcome this.
Right. And that's what I mean,
because if, if there's uncertainty in the words,
then you can bend them then whatever
way you want to have them.
And so that is, as it stands, the Karen is fixed
to land because of gravity.
That's what the council is saying. And yeah, I don't
Know, but the actual breach itself from your perspec from,
from your, you didn't actually get a consent for a fixed,
um, structure.
Well, in my, in my view, it wasn't fixed
because we moved it away.
So, uh, it's,
I still don't understand why I should get a consent
for a fixed structure if there is no fixed structure.
Um, but yeah,
but this, yeah, you can say
that was the breach of the rule. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. No, thank you.
And thank you for sharing that, um, with us.
Uh, that's, you know, valuable information for us
to take on board, Mathias.
So, uh, we have actually met time today,
so we appreciate your time
and, uh, your efforts with your submission. Thank you.
Thank you. So that, uh, brings us to the end
of our public hearing, uh, this afternoon.
So we are now going to into private sector.